<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Addenda</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="appendices" id="addenda" epub:type="appendix">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Addenda</h2>
			<p id="VI-page-xxi">Last summer <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Sotheby and Wilkinson sold some very interesting autograph letters written by Johnson to William Strahan, the printer.</p>
			<p>I was fortunate enough to find that the purchasers, with but one exception, were mindful of what Boswell so well describes as “the general courtesy of literature,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5549" id="noteref-5549" epub:type="noteref">5549</a> and were ready to place their treasures at my service. To one of them, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frederick Barker, of 43, Rowan Road, Brook Green, I am still more indebted, for he entrusted me not only with the original letters which he had just bought, but also with some others that he had previously possessed. His Johnsonian collection is one of unusual interest. I have moreover to acknowledge my obligations to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fawcett, of 14, King Street, Covent Garden; to <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> J. Pearson and <abbr>Co.</abbr>, of 46, Pall Mall; to <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Robson and Kerslake, of Coventry Street, Haymarket; to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frank T. Sabin, of 10 and 12, Garrick Street, Covent Garden; and to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Waller, of 2, Artesian Road, Westbourne Grove. Those of the letters which are undated, I have endeavoured to assign to their proper places by internal evidence. The absence of a date is in itself very strong evidence that they belong to a comparatively early period (see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-350">this note</a>).<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5550" id="noteref-5550" epub:type="noteref">5550</a></p>
			<p>I.</p>
			<p class="note-header">A letter about a projected Geographical Dictionary by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bathurst, with Bathurst’s Proposal; dated March 22, probably written in 1753.</p>
			<p>[In the possession of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frederick Barker, of 43, Rowan Road, Brook Green.]</p>
			<p>“Sir,<!-- salutation --></p>
			<p>“I have enclosed the Scheme which I mentioned yesterday in which the work proposed is sufficiently explained.</p>
			<p id="VI-page-xxii">“The Undertaker, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bathurst, is a Physician of the University of Cambridge, of about eight years standing, and will perform the work in such a manner as may satisfy the public. No advice of mine will be wanting, but advice will be all that I propose to contribute unless it should be thought worth while that I should write a preface, which if desired I will do and put my name to it. The terms which I am commissioned to offer are these:</p>
			<p>“1. A guinea and half shall be paid for each sheet of the copy.</p>
			<p>“2. The author will receive a Guinea and half a week from the date of the Contract.</p>
			<p>“3. As it is certain that many books will be necessary, the Author will at the end of the work take the books furnished him in part of payment at prime Cost, which will be a considerable reduction of the price of the Copy; or if it seems as you thought yesterday no reduction, he will allow out of the last payment fifty pounds for the use of the Books and return them.</p>
			<p>“4. In two months after his first demand of books shall be supplied, he purposes to write three Sheets a week and to continue the same quantity to the end of the work, unless he shall be hindered by want of Books. He does not however expect to be always able to write according to the order of the Alphabet but as his Books shall happen to supply him, and therefore cannot send any part to the press till the whole is nearly finished.</p>
			<p>“5. He undertakes as usual the Correction.</p>
			<p>“I am, Sir, Your most humble servant,<br/>
			“<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Sam.</abbr> Johnson.”</p>
			<p>“March 22nd.<br/>
			“To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan.”</p>
			<p>“Proposal.<!-- header --></p>
			<p>“There is nothing more apparently wanting to the English Literature, than a Geographical Dictionary, which, though its use is almost every day necessary, not only to Men of Study, but of Trade or public employment, yet has been hitherto, not only unperformed, but almost unattempted among us. Bohun’s Dictionary, the only one which has any pretension to regard, <a id="VI-page-xxiii"/>owes that pretension only to its bulk; for it is in all parts contemptibly defective and is therefore deservedly forgotten. In Collier’s Dictionary, what Geography there is, can scarcely be found among the crowd of other subjects, and when it is found, is of no great importance. The books of Eachard and Salmon, though useful for the ends proposed by them, are too small to be considered as anticipations of this work, which is intended to consist of two volumes of the same size and print with Harris’s Dictionary, in which will be comprised the following particulars:</p>
			<p>“The situation of every Country with its Provinces and dependencies according to its present state, and latest observation.</p>
			<p>“The description of all remarkable Cities, Towns, Castles, Fortresses, and places observable for their situation, products or other particulars.</p>
			<p>“An account of the considerable Rivers, their Springs, Branches, Course,<br/>
			Outlets, how far navigable, the Produce and Qualities of their waters.</p>
			<p>“The course of Voyages, giving directions to sailors for navigating from one place of the World to another, with particular attention to the Traffic of these Kingdoms.</p>
			<p>“An account of all the principal Ports and Harbours of the known World, in which will be laid down the Pilotage, Bearings, depth of water, danger from Sands or Rocks, firmness or uncertainty of Anchorage, and degree of safety from particular Winds.</p>
			<p>“An exact account of the Commodities of each Country, both natural and artificial.</p>
			<p>“A description of the remarkable Animals in every Country, whether<br/>
			Beasts, Birds or Fishes.</p>
			<p>“An account of the Buildings, whether ancient or modern, and of Ruins or other remains of Antiquity.</p>
			<p>“Remarks upon the soil, air, and waters of particular Places, their several qualities and effects, the accidents to which every Region is exposed, as Earthquakes and Hurricanes, and the diseases peculiar to the Inhabitants or incident to strangers at their arrival.</p>
			<p>“The political State of the World, the Government of Countries, and the<br/>
			Magistracy of Cities, with their particular Laws, or Privileges.</p>
			<p id="VI-page-xxiv">“The most probable and authentic Calculations of the number of Inhabitants of each place.</p>
			<p>“The military state of Countries, their Forces, manner of making War,<br/>
			Weapons, and naval Power.</p>
			<p>“The Commercial State, extent of their Trade, Number and strength of their Colonies, quantity of Shipping.</p>
			<p>“The pretensions of Princes with their Alliances, Relations and<br/>
			Genealogies.</p>
			<p>“The customs of Nations with regard to Trade, and receptions of strangers, their domestic Customs, as Rites of Marriage and Burial. Their particular Laws. Their habits, recreations and amusements.</p>
			<p>“The religious Opinions of all Nations.</p>
			<p>“These and many other heads of observation will be collected, not merely from the Dictionaries now extant in many Languages, but from the best Surveys, Local Histories, Voyages, and particular accounts,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5551" id="noteref-5551" epub:type="noteref">5551</a> among which care will be taken to select those of the best authority, as the basis of the Work, and to extract from them such observations as may best promote Knowledge and gratify Enquiry, so that it is to be hoped, there will be few remarkable places in the known World, of which the Politician, the Merchant, the Sailor, or the Man of Curiosity may not find a useful and pleasing account, of the credit of which the Reader may always judge, as the Authors from whom it is taken will be regularly quoted, a caution which if some, who have attempted such general works, had observed, their labours would have deserved, and found more favour from the Public.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5552" id="noteref-5552" epub:type="noteref">5552</a></p>
			<p>This letter must have been written about the year 1753, for Bathurst is described as a physician of about eight years’ standing. He took his degree as Bachelor of Medicine at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1745, and did not, it should seem, proceed to the higher degree. In 1757 he was at the Havannah, where he died (see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-713">this note</a>). He was Johnson’s beloved friend, of whom “he hardly ever spoke without tears in his eyes” (see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-560">this note</a>). The Proposal, I have no doubt, was either written, or at all events revised, by Johnson. It is quite in his style. It may be assumed that it is in Bathurst’s handwriting.</p>
			<p>II.</p>
			<p class="note-header" id="VI-page-xxv">An apologetical letter about some work that was passing through the press; undated, but probably written about the years 1753⁠–⁠5.</p>
			<p>[In the possession of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frederick Barker.]</p>
			<p>“Dear Sir<!-- salutation -->,</p>
			<p>“What you tell me I am ashamed never to have thought on⁠—I wish I had known it sooner⁠—Send me back the last sheet; and the last copy for correction. If you will promise me henceforward to print a sheet a day, I will promise you to endeavour that you shall have every day a sheet to print, beginning next Tuesday.</p>
			<p>“I am Sir, Your most, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Sam.</abbr> Johnson.<!-- signature -->”</p>
			<p>“To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan.”</p>
			<p>In all likelihood Johnson is writing about the Dictionary. The absence of a date, as I have already said, is strong evidence that the letter was written comparatively early. As the first edition of the Dictionary was in folio a sheet consisted of four pages. Johnson writing on April 3, 1753 says, “I began the second volume of my Dictionary, room being left in the first for Preface, Grammar, and History, none of them yet begun” (see <a href="part-1.xhtml#I-page-255">here</a>). As the book was published on April 15, 1755 (see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-849">this note</a>), the printing must have gone on very rapidly, when a start was once made. By <q>copy</q> he means his <q>manuscript for printing</q>.</p>
			<p>III, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span></p>
			<p class="note-header">Two undated letters about printing the Dictionary.</p>
			<p>[In the possession of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Waller, 2, Artesian Road, Westbourne Grove.]</p>
			<p>“Dear Sir<!-- salutation -->,</p>
			<p>“I must desire you to add to your other civilities this one, to go to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Millar and represent to him the manner of going on, <a id="VI-page-xxvi"/>and inform him that I know not how to manage. I pay three and twenty shillings a week to my assistants, in each instance having much assistance from them, but they tell me they shall be able to pull better in method, as indeed I intend they shall. The Point is to get two Guineas.</p>
			<p>“Sir, Your humble Servant,<br/>
			“<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Sam.</abbr> Johnson.”<br/>
			(Address on back.) “To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan.”</p>
			<p>“Sir,<!-- salutation --></p>
			<p>“I have often suspected that it is as you say, and have told <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dodsley of it. It proceeds from the haste of the amanuensis to get to the end of his day’s work. I have desired the passages to be clipped close, and then perhaps for two or three leaves it is done. But since poor Stuart’s time I could never get that part of the work into regularity, and perhaps never shall. I will try to take some more care but can promise nothing; when I am told there is a sheet or two I order it away. You will find it sometimes close; when I make up any myself, which never happens but when I have nobody with me, I generally clip it close, but one cannot always be on the watch.</p>
			<p>“I am Sir, Your most, <abbr>etc.</abbr><br/>
			“<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Sam.</abbr> Johnson.”</p>
			<p>These letters refer to the printing of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i>, of which Dodsley and Millar were two among the proprietors, and Strahan the printer. Francis Stuart or Stewart was one of Johnson’s amanuenses (see <a href="part-1.xhtml#I-page-187">here</a>). In 1779 Johnson paid his sister a guinea for an old pocketbook of her brother’s (see <a href="part-3.xhtml#III-page-418">here</a>), and wrote on April 8,1780 (see <a href="part-3.xhtml#III-page-421">here</a>):⁠—“The memory of her brother is yet fresh in my mind; he was an ingenious and worthy man.” In February 1784 he gave her another guinea for a letter relating to himself that he had found in the pocketbook (see <a href="part-4.xhtml#IV-page-262">here</a>). A writer in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i> for 1799, <abbr>p.</abbr> 1171, who had been employed in Strahan’s printing-works, says that “Stewart was useful to Johnson in the explanation of low cant phrases; all words relating to gambling and card-playing, such as <q>All-Fours</q>, <q>Catch-honours</q> [not in Johnson’s Dictionary], <q>Cribbage</q> [merely defined as <q>A game at cards</q>], were said to be Stewart’s corrected <a id="VI-page-xxvii"/>by the Doctor.” He adds that after the printing had gone on some time “the proprietors of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i> paid Johnson through <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan at the rate of a guinea for every sheet of <abbr>MS.</abbr> copy delivered. The copy was written upon quarto post, and in two columns each page. Johnson wrote in his own hand the words and their explanation, and generally two or three words in each column, leaving a space between each for the authorities, which were pasted on as they were collected by the different amanuenses employed: and in this mode the <abbr>MS.</abbr> was so regular that the sheets of <abbr>MS.</abbr> which made a sheet of print could be very exactly ascertained.” The same writer states that Stewart in a night ramble in Edinburgh with some of his drinking companions “met with the mob conducting Captain Porteous to be hanged; they were next day examined about it before the Town Council, when, as Stewart used to say, ‘we were found to be too drunk to have any hand in the business.’ He gave an accurate account of it in the Edinburgh Magazine of that time.”</p>
			<p>V.</p>
			<p class="note-header">A letter about Miss Williams, taxes due, and a journey; undated, but perhaps written at Oxford in 1754.</p>
			<p>[In the possession of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frederick Barker.]</p>
			<p>“Sir,<!-- salutation --></p>
			<p>“I shall not be long here, but in the meantime if Miss Williams wants any money pray speak to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Millar and supply her, they write to me about some taxes which I wish you would pay.</p>
			<p>“My journey will come to very little beyond the satisfaction of knowing that there is nothing to be done, and that I leave few advantages here to those that shall come after me.</p>
			<p>“I am Sir, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Sam.</abbr> Johnson.<!-- signature -->”</p>
			<p>“My compliments to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Strahan.</p>
			<p>To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan.”</p>
			<p id="VI-page-xxviii">Miss Williams came to live with Johnson after his wife’s death in 1752 (see <a href="part-1.xhtml#I-page-232">here</a>). The fact that Strahan is asked to supply her with money after speaking to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Millar seems to show that this letter was written some time before the publication of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i> in April 1755. Millar “took the principal charge of conducting its publication,” and Johnson “had received all the copy-money, by different drafts, a considerable time before he had finished his task” (<a href="part-1.xhtml#I-page-287">here</a>).</p>
			<p>His “journey” may have been his visit to Oxford in the summer of 1754. He went there, because, “I cannot,” he said, “finish my book [the Dictionary] to my mind without visiting the libraries’ (see <a href="part-1.xhtml#I-page-270">here</a>). According to Thomas Warton “he collected nothing in the libraries for his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i>“ (<i>ib</i> note 5). It is perhaps to this failure that the latter part of the letter refers, Johnson’s visit, however, was one of five weeks, while the first line of the letter shows that he intended to be away from London but a short time.</p>
			<p>VI.</p>
			<p class="note-header">A letter about “Rasselas,” dated <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 20, 1759.</p>
			<p>[In the possession of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frederick Barker.]</p>
			<p>“When I was with you last night I told you of a story which I was preparing for the press. The title will be</p>
			<p>‘The Choice of Life</p>
			<p>or</p>
			<p>The History of⁠ ⁠… Prince of Abissinia.’</p>
			<p>“It will make about two volumes like little Pompadour, that is about one middling volume. The bargain which I made with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Johnson was seventy five pounds (or guineas) a volume, and twenty five pounds for the second edition. I will sell this either at that price or for sixty,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5553" id="noteref-5553" epub:type="noteref">5553</a> the first edition of which he shall himself fix the number, and the property then to revert to me, or for forty pounds, and I have the profit that is retain half the copy. I shall have occasion for thirty pounds on Monday night when I shall deliver the book which I must <a id="VI-page-xxix"/>entreat you upon such delivery to procure me. I would have it offered to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Johnson, but have no doubt of selling it, on some of the terms mentioned.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5554" id="noteref-5554" epub:type="noteref">5554</a></p>
			<p>“I will not print my name, but expect it to be known.<br/>
			I am Dear Sir, Your most humble servant,<br/>
			<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Sam.</abbr> Johnson.<br/>
			<abbr>Jan.</abbr> 20, 1759.<br/>
			Get me the money if you can.”</p>
			<p>This letter is of unusual interest, as it proves beyond all doubt that <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rasselas</i> was written some weeks before <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Candide</i> was published (see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1028">this note</a>). Baretti, as I have shown (see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1024">this note</a>), says that “any other person with the degree of reputation Johnson then possessed would have got £400 for the work, but he never understood the art of making the most of his productions.” We see, however, by this letter that Johnson did ask for a larger sum than the booksellers allowed him. He received but one hundred pounds for the first edition, but he had made a bargain for one hundred and fifty pounds or guineas. Johnson, the bookseller, seems to have been but in a small way of business as a publisher. I do not find in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i> for 1758 any advertisement of books published by him, and only one in 1759 (P. 339). Cowper’s publisher in 1778 was Joseph Johnson of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s Churchyard. (Cowper’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Works</i> by Southey, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 285; see also Nichols’ <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Literary Anecdotes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> 461⁠–⁠464.)</p>
			<p>By “little Pompadour” Johnson, no doubt, means the second and cheaper edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The History of the Marchioness de Pompadour</i>. The first edition was published by Hooper in one volume, price five shillings (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i> for October 1758, <abbr>p.</abbr> 493). and the second in two volumes for three shillings and sixpence (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i> for November, 1758, <abbr>p.</abbr> 543).</p>
			<p>Johnson did not generally “print his name.” He published anonymously his translation of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lobo’s Voyage to Abyssinia</i>; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">London</i>; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Life of Savage</i>; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Rambler</i>, and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Idler</i>, both in separate numbers and when collected in volumes; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rasselas</i>; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">The False Alarm</i>; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Falkland’s Islands</i>; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">The Patriot</i>; and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Taxation no Tyranny</i>; (when these four pamphlets were collected in a volume he published them with the title of <a id="VI-page-xxx"/><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Political Tracts, by the Author of the Rambler</i>). He gave his name in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Vanity of Human Wishes</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Irene</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i>, his edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Shakespeare</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey to the Western Islands</i>, and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives of the Poets</i>.</p>
			<p>VII.</p>
			<p class="note-header">A letter about George Strahan’s election to a scholarship at University College, Oxford, and about William Strahan’s “affair with the University”; dated October 24, 1764.</p>
			<p>[In the possession of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frederick Barker.]</p>
			<p>“Sir,<!-- salutation --></p>
			<p>“I think I have pretty well disposed of my young friend George, who, if you approve of it, will be entered next Monday a Commoner of University College, and will be chosen next day a Scholar of the House. The Scholarship is a trifle, but it gives him a right, upon a vacancy, to a Fellowship of more than sixty pounds a year if he resides, and I suppose of more than forty if he takes a Curacy or small living. The College is almost filled with my friends, and he will be well treated. The Master is informed of the particular state of his education, and thinks, what I think too, that for Greek he must get some private assistance, which a servitour of the College is very well qualified and will be very willing to afford him on very easy terms.</p>
			<p>“I must desire your opinion of this scheme by the next post, for the opportunity will be lost if we do not now seize it, the Scholarships being necessarily filled up on Tuesday.</p>
			<p>“I depend on your proposed allowance of a hundred a year, which must the first year be a little enlarged because there are some extraordinary expenses, as</p>
			<p>Caution (which is allowed in his last quarter). . 7 0 0 Thirds. (He that enters upon a room pays two thirds of the furniture that he finds, and receives from his successor two thirds of what he pays; so that if he pays £20 he receives £13 6<abbr>s.</abbr> 8<abbr>d.</abbr>, this perhaps may be) 12 0 0 Fees at entrance, matriculation <abbr>etc.</abbr>, perhaps 2 0 0 His gown (I think) 2 10 0 ________ £ 23 10 0</p>
			<p id="VI-page-xxxi">“If you send us a Bill for about thirty pounds we shall set out commodiously enough. You should fit him out with clothes and linen, and let him start fair, and it is the opinion of those whom I consult, that with your hundred a year and the petty scholarship he may live with great ease to himself, and credit to you.</p>
			<p>“Let me hear as soon as is possible.</p>
			<p>“In your affair with the university, I shall not be consulted, but I hear nothing urged against your proposal.</p>
			<p>“I am, Sir,<br/>
			“Your humble servant,<br/>
			“<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Sam.</abbr> Johnson.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Oct.</abbr> 24, 1764.</p>
			<p>“My compliments to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Strahan.</p>
			<p>“To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan, Printer, in New Street, Shoe-lane, London.”</p>
			<p>My friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> C. J. Faulkner, Fellow and Tutor of University College, has given me the following extracts from the College records:⁠—</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Oct.</abbr> 30⁠–⁠31, 1764. Candidatis examinatis electi sunt Gulielmus Jones et Georgius Strahan in vacuas Exhibitiones Dmi Simonis Benet Baronetti.”</p>
			<p>Gulielmus Jones is the famous oriental scholar, Sir William Jones, whose portrait adorns the Hall of his ancient College (see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1536">this note</a>).</p>
			<p>On April 16, 1767, is found the election of “Georgium Strahan, sophistam in perpetuum hujus Collegii Socium.”</p>
			<p>He vacated his fellowship in 1773.</p>
			<p>The value of a Bennet scholarship in 1764 was ten pounds a year, with rooms added, the rent of which was reckoned as equal to two pounds more. A fellowship on the same foundation was worth about twenty pounds, with a yearly dividend added to it that amounted to about thirty pounds. “Fines’ (see <a href="part-3.xhtml#III-page-323">here</a>) and other extra payments might easily raise the value to more than sixty pounds.</p>
			<p id="VI-page-xxxii">The “caution” is the sum deposited by an undergraduate with the College Bursar or Steward as a security for the payment of his “battells’ or account. Johnson in 1728 had to pay at Pembroke College the same sum (seven pounds) that George Strahan in 1764 had to pay at University College. see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-172">this note</a>.</p>
			<p>Johnson wrote four letters to George Strahan, when he was a boy at school, and one letter when he was at College. (See Croker’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Johnson</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 129, 130, 161, 168.) In this last letter, dated May 25, 1765, he writes: “Do not tire yourself so much with Greek one day as to be afraid of looking on it the next; but give it a certain portion of time, suppose four hours, and pass the rest of the day in Latin or English. I would have you learn French, and take in a literary journal once a month, which will accustom you to various subjects, and inform you what learning is going forward in the world. Do not omit to mingle some lighter books with those of more importance; that which is read <i xml:lang="la">remisso animo</i> is often of great use, and takes great hold of the remembrance. However, take what course you will, if you be diligent you will be a scholar.”</p>
			<p>George Strahan attended Johnson on his deathbed, and published the volume called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prayers and Meditations composed by Samuel Johnson</i>. See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-688">this note</a>; and <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5392">this note</a>.</p>
			<p>William Strahan’s “affair with the University” was very likely connected with the lease of the University Printing House. From the “Orders of the Delegates of the Press,” 1758, I have been permitted to copy the following entry, which bears a date but six days later than that of Johnson’s letter.</p>
			<p>“Tuesday, <abbr>Oct.</abbr> 30, 1764. At a meeting of the Delegates of the Press.</p>
			<p>“Ordered,</p>
			<p>“That the following articles be made the foundation of the new lease to be granted of the moiety of the Printing House; that a copy of them be delivered to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Baskett and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Eyre, and that they be desired to give in their respective proposals at a meeting to be held on Tuesday the sixth of November.” (P. 41.)</p>
			<p>The chief part of the lease consisted of the privilege to print Bibles and Prayer Books. I conjecture that Strahan had hoped to get a share in the lease.</p>
			<p>VIII.</p>
			<p class="note-header" id="VI-page-xxxiii">A letter about a cancel in Johnson’s “Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland’, dated <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 30, 1774.</p>
			<p>[In the possession of <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Pearson and <abbr>Co.</abbr>, 46, Pall Mall.]</p>
			<p>“Sir,<!-- salutation --></p>
			<p>“I waited on you this morning having forgotten your new engagement; for this you must not reproach me, for if I had looked upon your present station with malignity I could not have forgotten it. I came to consult you upon a little matter that gives me some uneasiness. In one of the pages there is a severe censure of the clergy of an English Cathedral which I am afraid is just, but I have since recollected that from me it may be thought improper, for the Dean did me a kindness about forty years ago. He is now very old, and I am not young. Reproach can do him no good, and in myself I know not whether it is zeal or wantonness. Can a leaf be cancelled without too much trouble? tell me what I shall do. I have no settled choice, but I would not wish to allow the charge. To cancel it seems the surer side. Determine for me.</p>
			<p>“I am, Sir, Your most humble servant,<br/>
			“<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Sam.</abbr> Johnson.”<br/>
			“<abbr>Nov.</abbr> 30, 1774.</p>
			<p>“Tell me your mind: if you will cancel it I will write something to fill up the vacuum. Please to direct to the borough.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan’s “new engagement” was in the House of Commons at Westminster,<br/>
			to which he had been elected for the first time as member for Malmesbury.<br/>
			The new Parliament had met on <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 29, the day before the date of<br/>
			Johnson’s letter (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Parliamentary History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span> 23).</p>
			<p>The leaf that Johnson cancelled contained pages 47, 48 in the first edition of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey to the Western Islands</i>. It corresponds with pages 19⁠–⁠30 in volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span> of Johnson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Works</i> (<abbr>ed.</abbr> 1825), beginning with the words “could not enter,” and ending “imperfect constitution.” The excision is marked by a ridge of paper, which was left that the revised leaf might be <a id="VI-page-xxxiv"/>attached to it. Johnson describes how the lead which covered the Cathedrals of Elgin and Aberdeen had been stripped off by the order of the Scottish Council, and shipped to be sold in Holland. He continues:⁠—“Let us not however make too much haste to despise our neighbours. Our own cathedrals are mouldering by unregarded dilapidation. It seems to be part of the despicable philosophy of the time to despise monuments of sacred magnificence, and we are in danger of doing that deliberately, which the Scots did not do but in the unsettled state of an imperfect constitution.”</p>
			<p>In the copy of the first edition in the Bodleian Library, which had belonged to Gough the antiquary, there is written in his hand, as a footnote to “neighbours”: “There is now, as I have heard, a body of men not less decent or virtuous than the Scottish Council, longing to melt the lead of an English Cathedral. What they shall melt, it were just that they should swallow.” It can scarcely be doubted that this is the suppressed passage. The English Cathedral to which Johnson refers was, I believe, Lichfield. “The roof,” says Harwood (History of Lichfield, <abbr>p.</abbr> 75), “was formerly covered with lead, but now with slate.” Addenbroke, who had been Dean since 1745, was, we may assume, very old at the time when Johnson wrote. I had at first thought it not unlikely that it was <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Thomas Newton, Dean of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s and Bishop of Bristol, who was censured. He was a Lichfield man, and was known to Johnson (see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5110">this note</a>). He was, however, only seventy years old. I am informed moreover by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> W. Sparrow Simpson, the learned editor of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Documents illustrating the History of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s</i>, that it is very improbable that at this time the Dean and Chapter of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s entertained such a thought.</p>
			<p>My friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> C. E. Doble has kindly furnished me with the following curious parallel to Johnson’s suppressed wish about the molten lead.</p>
			<p>“The chappell of our Lady [at Wells], late repayred by Stillington, a place of great reverence and antiquitie, was likewise defaced, and such was their thirst after lead (I would they had drunke it scalding) that they tooke the dead bodies of bishops out of their leaden coffins, and cast abroad the carkases <a id="VI-page-xxxv"/>skarce throughly putrified.”⁠—Harington’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Nuga Antiquae</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> 147 (<abbr>ed.</abbr> 1804).</p>
			<p>In the postscript Johnson says “Please to direct to the borough.” He was staying in See <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale’s town-house in the Borough of Southwark. (<a href="part-1.xhtml#I-page-493">here</a>.)</p>
			<p>IX.</p>
			<p class="note-header">A letter about apprenticing a lad to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan, and about a presentation to the Blue Coat School, dated December 22, 1774.</p>
			<p>[In the possession of <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Robson and Kerslake, 25, Coventry Street Haymarket.]</p>
			<p>“Sir,</p>
			<p>“When we meet we talk, and I know not whether I always recollect what I thought I had to say.</p>
			<p>“You will please to remember that I once asked you to receive an apprentice, who is a scholar, and has always lived in a clergyman’s house, but who is mishapen, though I think not so as to hinder him at the case. It will be expected that I should answer his Friend who has hitherto maintained him, whether I can help him to a place. He can give no money, but will be kept in clothes.</p>
			<p>“I have another request which it is perhaps not immediately in your power to gratify. I have a presentation to beg for the blue coat hospital. The boy is a non-freeman, and has both his parents living. We have a presentation for a freeman which we can give in exchange. If in your extensive acquaintance you can procure such an exchange, it will be an act of great kindness. Do not let the matter slip out of your mind, for though I try others I know not anybody of so much power to do it.</p>
			<p>“I am, Sir, Your most humble Servant,</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Sam.</abbr> Johnson.<!-- signature -->”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Dec.</abbr> 22, 1774.”</p>
			<p>The apprentice was young William Davenport, the orphan son of a clergyman.<br/>
			His friend was the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> W. Langley, the master of Ashbourne School.<br/>
			Strahan received him as an apprentice (see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2446">this note</a>). See also<br/>
			Nichols’ <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Literary Anecdotes</i>, volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 287.</p>
			<p>The “case” is the frame containing boxes for holding type.</p>
			<p>X.</p>
			<p class="note-header" id="VI-page-xxxvi">A letter about suppressions in “Taxation no Tyranny! dated March 1, 1775.</p>
			<p>[In the possession of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frank T. Sabin, 10 &amp; 12, Garrick Street Covent Garden.]</p>
			<p>“Sir,<!-- salutation --></p>
			<p>“I am sorry to see that all the alterations proposed are evidences of timidity. You may be sure that I do [? not] wish to publish, what those for whom I write do not like to have published. But print me half a dozen copies in the original state, and lay them up for me. It concludes well enough as it is.</p>
			<p>“When you print it, if you print it, please to frank one to me here, and frank another to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Aston at Stow Hill, Lichfield.</p>
			<p>“The changes are not for the better, except where facts were mistaken. The last paragraph was indeed rather contemptuous, there was once more of it which I put out myself.</p>
			<p>“I am Sir, Your humble Servant,<br/>
			“<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Sam.</abbr> Johnson.”</p>
			<p>“March 1, 1775.”</p>
			<p>This letter refers to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Taxation no Tyranny</i>, which was published before March 31, 1775, the date of Boswell’s arrival in London (see <a href="part-2.xhtml#II-page-311">here</a>). Boswell says that he had in his possession “a few proof leaves of it marked with corrections in Johnson’s own handwriting” (ib. <abbr>p.</abbr> 313). Johnson, he says,” owned to me that it had been revised and curtailed by some of those who were then in power.” When Johnson writes “when you print it, if you print it,” he uses, doubtless, <q>print</q> in the sense of <q>striking off copies</q>. The pamphlet was, we may assume, in type before it was revised by “those in power.” The corrections had been made in the proof-sheets. Johnson asks to have six copies laid by for him in the state in which he had wished to publish it. It seems that the last paragraph had been struck out by the reviser, for Johnson says “it was rather contemptuous.” He does not think it needful to supply anything in its place, for he says “it concludes well enough as it is.”</p>
			<p>see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan had the right, as a member of Parliament, to frank all <a id="VI-page-xxxvii"/>letters and packets. That is to say, by merely writing his signature on the cover he could pass them through the post free of charge. Johnson, when he wrote to Scotland, used to employ him to frank his letters, “that he might have the consequence of appearing a parliament-man among his countrymen” (<a href="part-3.xhtml#III-page-364">here</a>). It was to Oxford that a copy of the pamphlet was to be franked to Johnson. That he was there at the time is shown by a letter from him in see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Piozzi’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collection</i> (volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 212), dated “University College, Oxford, March 3, 1775.” Writing to her, evidently from Bolt Court, on February 3, he had said: “My pamphlet has not gone on at all” (ib. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 211). <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Aston (or rather Miss Aston) is mentioned <a href="part-2.xhtml#II-page-466">here</a>.</p>
			<p>XI<!-- header --></p>
			<p class="note-header">A letter about “copy” and a book by Professor Watson, dated <abbr>Oct.</abbr> 14, 1776.</p>
			<p>[In the possession of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> H. Fawcett, of 14, King Street, Covent Garden.]</p>
			<p>“Sir,<!-- salutation --></p>
			<p>“I wrote to you about ten days ago, and sent you some copy. You have not written again, that is a sorry trick.</p>
			<p>“I am told that you are printing a Book for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Professor Watson of Saint Andrews, if upon any occasion, I can give any help, or be of any use, as formerly in <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Robertson’s publication, I hope you will make no scruple to call upon me, for I shall be glad of an opportunity to show that my reception at Saint Andrews has not been forgotten.</p>
			<p>“I am Sir, Your humble Servant,<br/>
			“<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Sam.</abbr> Johnson.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Oct.</abbr> 14, 1776.”</p>
			<p>The’ copy’ or see <abbr>MS.</abbr> that Johnson sent is, I conjecture, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Proposals for the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shaw’s Analysis of the Scotch Celtic Language</i> (<a href="part-3.xhtml#III-page-107">here</a>). This is the only acknowledged piece of writing of his during 1776. The book printing for Professor Watson was <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Reign of Philip <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, which was published by Strahan and Cadell in 1777. This letter is of unusual interest, as showing that Johnson had been of some service as regards one of Robertson’s books. It is possible that he read some of <a id="VI-page-xxxviii"/>the proof-sheets, and helped to get rid of the Scotticisms. “Strahan,” according to Beattie, “had corrected (as he told me himself) the phraseology of both <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hume and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Robertson” (see Boswell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i><!-- <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 92, note 3 -->). He is not unlikely, in Robertson’s case, to have sought and obtained Johnson’s help.</p>
			<p>XII.<!-- header --></p>
			<p class="note-header">The following letter is published in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Alfred Morrison’s “Collection of Autographs’, volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 343.</p>
			<p>“To <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor. Dated London, April 20, 1778.”<!-- recipient --></p>
			<p>“The quantity of blood taken from you appears to me not sufficient. Thrale was almost lost by the scrupulosity of his physicians, who never bled him copiously till they bled him in despair; he then bled till he fainted, and the stricture or obstruction immediately gave way and from that instant he grew better.</p>
			<p>“I can now give you no advice but to keep yourself totally quiet and amused with some gentle exercise of the mind. If a suspected letter comes, throw it aside till your health is reestablished; keep easy and cheerful company about you, and never try to think but at those stated and solemn times when the thoughts are summoned to the cares of futurity, the only cares of a rational being.</p>
			<p>“As to my own health I think it rather grows better; the convulsions which left me last year at Ashbourne have never returned, and I have by the mercy of God very comfortable nights. Let me know very often how you are till you are quite well.”</p>
			<p>This letter, though it is dated 1778, must have been written in 1780. Thrale’s first attack was in June, 1779, when he was in “extreme danger” (see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4064">this note</a>). Johnson had the remission of the convulsions on June 18, 1779. He recorded on June 18, 1780:⁠—</p>
			<p>“In the morning of this day last year I perceived the remission of those convulsions in my breast which had distressed me for more than twenty years. I returned thanks at church for the mercy granted me, which has now continued a year.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prayers and Meditations</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 183.</p>
			<p id="VI-page-xxxix">Three days later he wrote to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale:⁠—</p>
			<p>“It was a twelvemonth last Sunday since the convulsions in my breast left me. I hope I was thankful when I recollected it; by removing that disorder a great improvement was made in the enjoyment of life.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Piozzi Letters</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> 163. (See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4063">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>He was at Ashbourne on June 18, 1779 (see <a href="part-3.xhtml#III-page-453">here</a>).</p>
			<p>On April 20, 1778, the very day of which this letter bears the date, he recorded:⁠—</p>
			<p>“After a good night, as I am forced to reckon, I rose seasonably.⁠ ⁠… In reviewing my time from Easter, 1777, I found a very melancholy and shameful blank. So little has been done that days and months are without any trace. My health has, indeed, been very much interrupted. My nights have been commonly not only restless, but painful and fatiguing..⁠ ⁠… Some relaxation of my breast has been procured, I think, by opium, which, though it never gives me sleep, frees my breast from spasms.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prayers and Meditations</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 169. See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3796">this note</a>.</p>
			<p>For Johnson’s advice about bleeding, see <a href="part-3.xhtml#III-page-152">here</a>; and for possible occasions for “suspected letters,” see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1391">this note</a>; and <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2048">this note</a>.</p>
			<p class="note-header"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason’s “sneering observation in his ‘Memoirs of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> William Whitehead’ ”</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 31.)</p>
			<p>I had long failed to find a copy of these <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs</i>, though I had searched in the Bodleian, the British Museum, and the London Library, and had applied to the University Library at Cambridge, and the Advocates’ Library at Edinburgh. By the kindness of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> R. H. Soden Smith and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> R. F. Sketchley, I have obtained the following extract from a copy in the Dyce and Forster Libraries, in the South Kensington Museum:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Conscious, notwithstanding, that to avoid writing what is <em>unnecessary</em> is, in these days, no just plea for silence in a biographer, I have some apology to make for having strewed these pages so thinly with the tittle-tattle of anecdote. I am, however, too proud to make this apology to any person but my bookseller, who will be the only real loser by the defect.</p>
			<p id="VI-page-xl">“Those readers, who believe that I do not write immediately under his pay, and who may have gathered from what they have already read, that I am not so passionately enamoured of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s biographical manner, as to take that for my model, have only to throw these pages aside, and wait till they are new-written by some one of his numerous disciples, who may follow his master’s example; and should more anecdote than I furnish him with be wanting (as was the Doctor’s case in his life of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gray), may make amends for it by those acid eructations of vituperative criticism, which are generated by unconcocted taste and intellectual indigestion.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Poems by William Whitehead</i>, York, 1788 (volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 128).</p>
			<p>With this “sneering observation,” which Boswell might surely have passed over in silence, the Memoirs close.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Michael Johnson as a bookseller.</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-118">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> R. F. Sketchley kindly informs me that in the Dyce and Forster Libraries at the South Kensington Museum there is a book with the following title:⁠—</p>
			<p>
				<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">S. Shaw’s “Grammatica Anglo⁠—Romana”, London, printed for Michael Johnson, bookseller: and are to be sold at his shops in Litchfield and Uttoxiter in Stafford-shire; and Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire, 1687.</i>
			</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> C. E. Doble tells me that in the proposals issued in 1690 by Thomas Bennet, <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s Churchyard, for printing Anthony à Wood’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Athenae Oxonienses</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fasti Oxonienses</i>, among “the booksellers who take subscriptions, give receipts, and deliver books according to the proposals’ is “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Johnson in Litchfield.”</p>
			<p class="note-header">The City and County of Lichfield</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-119">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>“The City of Litchfield is a County of itself, with a jurisdiction extending 10 or 12 miles round, which circuit the Sheriff rides every year on <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 8.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Tour through the Whole Island of Great Britain</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1769, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> 419.</p>
			<p id="VI-page-xli">Balliol College has a copy of this work containing David Garrick’s bookplate, with Shakespeare’s head at the top of it, and the following quotation from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Menagiana</i> at the foot:⁠—</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">La première chose qu’on doit faire quand on a emprunté un livre, c’est de le lire, afin de pouvoir le rendre plutôt (sic)</i>.”</p>
			<p class="note-header">Felixmarte of Hircania</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 49.)</p>
			<p>“ ‘He that follows is <em>Florismarte of Hyrcania</em>’ said the barber. ‘What! is Signor Florismarte there?’ replied the priest; ‘in good faith he shall share the same fate, notwithstanding his strange birth and chimerical adventures; for his harsh and dry style will admit of no excuse. To the yard with him, therefore.’ ‘With all my heart, dear Sir,’ answered the housekeeper; ‘and with joyful alacrity she executed the command.” ’⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Don Quixote</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1820, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 48.</p>
			<p>Boswell speaks of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Felixmarte</i> as the old Spanish romance. In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Bibliografia dei Romanzi e Poeini Cavallereschi Italiani</i> (2nd <abbr>ed.</abbr>, Milan, 1838), <abbr>p.</abbr> 351, it is stated that in the Spanish edition it is called a translation from the Italian, and in the Italian edition a translation from the Spanish. The Italian title is <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Historia di Don Florismante d’Ircania, tradotta dallo Spagnuolo</i>. Cervantes, in an edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Don Quixote</i>, published in 1605, which I have looked at, calls the book <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Florismarte de Hircania</i> (not <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Florismante</i>). It should seem that he made his hero read the Italian version.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Palmerin of England and Don Belianis</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-158">this note</a>; and volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 2.)</p>
			<p>“ ‘Let <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Palmerin of England</i> be preserved,’ said the licentiate, ‘and kept as a jewel; and let such another casket be made for it as that which Alexander found among the spoils of Darius appropriated to preserve the works of the poet Homer.⁠ ⁠… Therefore, master Nicholas, saving your better judgment let this and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Amadis de Gaul</i> be exempted from the flames, and let all the rest perish without any farther inquiry.’ ‘Not so neighbour,’ <a id="VI-page-xlii"/>replied the barber, ‘for behold here the renowned <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Don Belianis</i>.’ The priest replied, ‘This with the second, third, and fourth parts, wants a little rhubarb to purge away its excessive choler; there should be removed too all that relates to the castle of Fame, and other impertinencies of still greater consequence; let them have the benefit, therefore, of transportation, and as they show signs of amendment they shall hereafter be treated with mercy or justice; in the meantime, friend, give them room in your house; but let nobody read them.’ ”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Don Quixote</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1820, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 50.</p>
			<p class="note-header"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Taylor, a Birmingham manufacturer</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 86.)</p>
			<p>“John Taylor, <abbr>Esq.</abbr> may justly be deemed the Shakespeare or Newton of Birmingham. He rose from minute beginnings to shine in the commercial hemisphere, as they in the poetical or philosophical. To this uncommon genius we owe the gilt button, the japanned and gilt snuffbox, with the numerous race of enamels; also the painted snuffbox.⁠ ⁠… He died in 1775 at the age of 64, after acquiring a fortune of £200,000. His son was a considerable sufferer at the time of the riots in 1791.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Brief History of Birmingham</i>, 1797, <abbr>p.</abbr> 9.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Olivia Lloyd.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 92.)</p>
			<p>I am, no doubt, right in identifying Olivia Lloyd, the young quaker, with whom Johnson was much enamoured when at Stourbridge School, with Olive Lloyd, the daughter of the first Sampson Lloyd, of Birmingham, and aunt of the Sampson Lloyd with whom he had an altercation (see <a href="part-2.xhtml#II-page-458">here</a> and see <a href="addenda.xhtml#VI-page-liii">here</a>). “A fine likeness of her is preserved by Thomas Lloyd, The Priory, Warwick,” as I learn from an interesting little work called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Farm and its Inhabitants, with some Account of the Lloyds of Dolobran</i>, by Rachel J. Lowe. Privately printed, 1883, <abbr>p.</abbr> 24. Her elder brother married a Miss Careless; ib. <abbr>p.</abbr> 23. Johnson’s “first love,” Hector’s sister, married a <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Careless (<a href="part-2.xhtml#II-page-459">here</a>).</p>
			<p class="note-header" id="VI-page-xliii">Henry Porter, of Edgbaston.</p>
			<p>(see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-286">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>In <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s Church, Warwick, is a monument to⁠—</p>
			<p>“Anna Norton, Henrici Porter<br/>
			Filia<br/>
			Nuper de Edgberston in Com. Warw. Generosi;<br/>
			Vidua Thomae Norton.⁠ ⁠…<br/>
			Haec annis et pietate matura vitam deposuit.<br/>
			Maii 14, 1698.”</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Brief Description of the Collegiate Church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary in Warwick</i>, published by Grafton and Reddell, Birmingham; no date.</p>
			<p class="note-header"><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams’s account of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Johnson and her sons by her former marriage.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 95.)</p>
			<p>The following note by Malone I failed to quote in the right place. It is copied from a paper, written by Lady Knight.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams’s account of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Johnson was, that she had a good understanding and great sensibility, but inclined to be satirical. Her first husband died insolvent [this is a mistake, see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-291">this note</a>]; her sons were much disgusted with her for her second marriage;⁠ ⁠… however, she always retained her affection for them. While they [<abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Johnson] resided in Gough Square, her son, the officer, knocked at the door, and asked the maid if her mistress was at home. She answered, ‘Yes, Sir, but she is sick in bed.’ ‘Oh,’ says he, ‘if it’s so, tell her that her son Jervis called to know how she did;’ and was going away. The maid begged she might run up to tell her mistress, and, without attending his answer, left him. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Johnson, enraptured to hear her son was below, desired the maid to tell him she longed to embrace him. When the maid descended the gentleman was gone, and poor <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Johnson was much agitated by the adventure; it was the only time he ever made an effort to see her. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> [<abbr>Mr.</abbr>] Johnson did all he could to console his wife, but told <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams: ‘Her son <a id="VI-page-xliv"/>is uniformly undutiful; so I conclude, like many other sober men, he might once in his life be drunk, and in that fit nature got the better of his pride.’ ”</p>
			<p class="note-header">Johnson’s application for the mastership of the Grammar School at Solihull in Warwickshire</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 96.)</p>
			<p>Johnson, a few weeks after his marriage, applied for the mastership of<br/>
			Solihull Grammar School, as is shown by the following letter, preserved<br/>
			in the Pembroke College <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, addressed to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Walmsley, and quoted by<br/>
			<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Croker. I failed to insert it in my notes.</p>
			<p>
				<i>“Solihull, the 30 August 1735.</i>
			</p>
			<p>“Sir,<!-- salutation --></p>
			<p>“I was favoured with yours of the 13th inst. in due time, but deferred answering it til now, it takeing up some time to informe the Foeofees of the contents thereof; and before they would return an Answer, desired some time to make enquiry of the caracter of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Johnson, who all agree that he is an excellent scholar, and upon that account deserves much better than to be schoolmaster of Solihull. But then he has the caracter of being a very haughty, ill-natured gent., and that he has such a way of distorting his Face (which though he can’t help) the gent, think it may affect some young ladds; for these two reasons he is not approved on, the late master <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crompton’s huffing the Foeofees being stil in their memory. However, we are all exstreamly obliged to you for thinking of us, and for proposeing so good a schollar, but more especially is, dear sir,</p>
			<p>“Your very humble servant,</p>
			<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:signature">Henry Greswold</span>.”</p>
			<p class="note-header">Johnson’s knowledge of Italian</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 115.)</p>
			<p>Boswell says that he does not know “at what time, or by what means Johnson had acquired a competent knowledge of Italian.” In my note on this I say “he had read Petrarch ‘when but a boy.’ ” <a id="VI-page-xlv"/>As Petrarch wrote chiefly in Latin, it is quite possible that Johnson did not acquire his knowledge of Italian so early as I had thought.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Johnson’s deference for the general opinion</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 200.)</p>
			<p>Miss Burney records an interesting piece of criticism by Johnson. “There are,” he said, “three distinct kinds of judges upon all new authors or productions; the first are those who know no rules, but pronounce entirely from their natural taste and feelings; the second are those who know and judge by rules; and the third are those who know, but are above the rules. These last are those you should wish to satisfy. Next to them rate the natural judges; but ever despise those opinions that are formed by the rules.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Mme.</abbr> D’Arblay’s Diary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 180. Later on she writes:⁠—“The natural feelings of untaught hearers ought never to be slighted; and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson has told me the same a thousand times;” ib. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> 128.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Johnson in the Green Room</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 201.)</p>
			<p>see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richard Herne Shepherd, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Watford’s Antiquarian</i> for January, 1887, <abbr>p.</abbr> 34, asserts that the actual words which Johnson used when he told Garrick that he would no longer frequent his Green Room were indecent; so indecent that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepherd can only venture to satisfy those whom he calls students by informing them of them privately. For proof of this charge against the man whose boast it was that “obscenity had always been repressed in his company” (<a href="part-4.xhtml#IV-page-295">here</a>) he brings forward John Wilkes. The story, indeed, as it is told by Boswell, is not too trustworthy, for he had it through Hume from Garrick. As it reaches see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepherd it comes from Garrick through Wilkes. Garrick, no doubt, as Johnson says (see Boswell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i> <!-- <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 391 -->), was, as a companion, “restrained by some principle,” and had “some delicacy of feeling.” Nevertheless, in his stories, he was, we may be sure, no more on oath than a man is in lapidary inscriptions (<a href="part-2.xhtml#II-page-407">here</a>). It is possible that he reported <a id="VI-page-xlvi"/>Johnson’s very words to Hume, and that Hume did not change them in reporting them to Boswell. Whatever they were, they were spoken in 1749 and published in 1791, when Johnson had been dead six years, Garrick twelve years, and Hume fourteen years. It is idle to dream that they can now be conjecturally emended. But it is worse than idle to bring in as evidence John Wilkes. What entered his ear as purity itself might issue from his mouth as the grossest obscenity. He had no delicacy of feeling. No principle restrained him. When he comes to bear testimony, and aims a shaft at any man’s character, the bow that he draws is drawn with the weakness of the hand of a worn-out and shameless profligate.</p>
			<p>See <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepherd quotes an unpublished letter of Boswell to Wilkes, dated Rome, April 22, 1765, to show “that the two men had become familiars, not only long before Wilkes’s famous meeting with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson was brought about, but before even the friendship of Boswell himself with Johnson had been consolidated.” It needs no unpublished letters to show that. It must be known to every attentive reader of Boswell. <a href="part-1.xhtml#I-page-395">here</a>, and <a href="part-2.xhtml#II-page-11">here</a>.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Frederick <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, King of Prussia</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 308.)</p>
			<p>Boswell should have written Frederick <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Boswell’s visit to Rousseau and Voltaire</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 434; and volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 11.)</p>
			<p class="note-header">Boswell to Andrew Mitchell, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, His Britannic Majesty’s Minister at Berlin.</p>
			<p>“Berlin, 28 August, 1764.</p>
			<p>… “I have had another letter from my father, in which he continues of opinion that travelling is of very little use, and may do a great deal of harm.⁠ ⁠… I esteem and love my father, and I am determined to do what is in my power to make him easy and happy. But you will allow that I may endeavour to make him happy, and at the same time not to be too hard upon myself. I must use you so much with the freedom of a friend <a id="VI-page-xlvii"/>as to tell you that with the vivacity which you allowed me I have a melancholy disposition. I have made excursions into the fields of amusement, perhaps of folly. I have found that amusement and folly are beneath me, and that without some laudable pursuit my life must be insipid and wearisome..⁠ ⁠… My father seems much against my going to Italy, but gives me leave to go from this, and pass some months in Paris. I own that the words of the Apostle Paul, ‘I must see Rome,’ are strongly <em>borne in</em> upon my mind. It would give me infinite pleasure. It would give taste for a lifetime, and I should go home to Auchinleck with serene contentment.”</p>
			<p>After stating that he is going to Geneva, he continues:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I shall see Voltaire; I shall also see Switzerland and Rousseau. These two men are to me greater objects than most statues or pictures.”⁠—Nichols’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Literary History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 318.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Superficiality of the French writers</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 454.)</p>
			<p>Gibbon, writing of the year 1759, says:⁠—</p>
			<p>“In France, to which my ideas [in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essay on the Study of Literature</i>] were confined, the learning and language of Greece and Rome were neglected by a philosophic age. The guardian of those studies, the Academy of Inscriptions, was degraded to the lowest rank among the three royal societies of Paris; the new appellation of <q>Erudits</q> was contemptuously applied to the successors of Lipsius and Casaubon; and I was provoked to hear (see M. d’Alembert, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Discours préliminaire à l’Encyclopedie</i>) that the exercise of the memory, their sole merit, had been superseded by the nobler faculties of the imagination and the judgment.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Edward Gibbon</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1827, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 104.</p>
			<p class="note-header">A Synod of Cooks</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 470.)</p>
			<p>When Johnson spoke of “a Synod of Cooks’ he was, I conjecture, thinking of Milton’s “Synod of Gods,” in Beelzebub’s speech in Paradise Lost, book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> line 391.</p>
			<p class="note-header" id="VI-page-xlviii">Johnson and Bishop Percy.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 486.)</p>
			<p>Bishop Percy in a letter to Boswell says: “When in 1756 or 1757 I became acquainted with Johnson, he told me he had lived twenty years in London, but not very happily.”⁠—Nichols’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Literary History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 307.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Barclay’s Answer to Kenrick’s Review of Johnson’s “Shakespeare.”</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 498.)</p>
			<p>Neither in the British Museum nor in the Bodleian have I been able to find a copy of this book. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Defence of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kenricks Review</i>, 1766, does not seem to contain any reply to such a work as Barclay’s.</p>
			<p class="note-header"><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Piozzi’s “Collection of Johnson s Letters.”</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1585">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>Mr. Boswell To Bishop Percy.<!-- recipient --><br/>
			“<abbr>Feb.</abbr> 9, 1788.</p>
			<p>“I am ashamed that I have yet seven years to write of his life.⁠ ⁠… <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> (Thrale) Piozzi’s Collection of his letters will be out soon.⁠ ⁠… I saw a sheet at the printing-house yesterday⁠ ⁠… It is wonderful what avidity there still is for everything relative to Johnson. I dined at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Malone’s on Wednesday with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> W. G. Hamilton, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Flood, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Windham, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Courtenay, <abbr>etc.</abbr>; and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hamilton observed very well what a proof it was of Johnson’s merit that we had been talking of him all the afternoon.”⁠—Nichols’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Literary History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 309.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Johnson on romantic virtue</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, P. 76.)</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson used to advise his friends to be upon their guard against romantic virtue, as being founded upon no settled <a id="VI-page-xlix"/>principle. ‘A plank,’ said he, ‘that is tilted up at one end must of course fall down on the other.’ “⁠—William <b epub:type="z3998:surname">Seward</b>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anecdotes of Distinguished Persons</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> 461.”</p>
			<p class="note-header">“Old” Baxter on toleration</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 253.)</p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> John Hamilton Davies, B.A., F.R.H.S., Rector of <abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas’s, Worcester, and author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Life of Richard Baxter of Kidderminster, Preacher and Prisoner</i> (London, Kent &amp; <abbr>Co.</abbr>, 1887), kindly informs me, in answer to my inquiries, that he believes that Johnson may allude to the following passage in the fourth chapter of Baxter’s Reformed Pastor:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I think the Magistrate should be the hedge of the Church. I am against the two extremes of universal license and persecuting tyranny. The Magistrate must be allowed the use of his reason, to know the cause, and follow his own judgment, not punish men against it. I am the less sorry that the Magistrate doth so little interpose.”</p>
			<p class="note-header">England barren in good historians</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2159">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>Gibbon, writing of the year 1759, says:</p>
			<p>“The old reproach that no British altars had been raised to the muse of history was recently disproved by the first performances of Robertson and Hume, the histories of Scotland and of the Stuarts.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Edward Gibbon</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1827, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 103.</p>
			<p class="note-header">An instance of Scotch nationality</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 307.)</p>
			<p>Lord Camden, when pressed by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Berkeley (the Bishop’s son) to appoint a Scotchman to some office, replied: “I have many years ago sworn that I never will introduce a Scotchman into any office; for if you introduce one he will contrive some way or other to introduce forty more cousins or friends.”⁠—G. M. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Berkeley’s Poems</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> ccclxxi.</p>
			<p class="note-header" id="VI-page-l">Mortality in the Foundling Hospital of London.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 398.)</p>
			<p>“From March 25, 1741, to December 31, 1759, the number of children received into the Foundling Hospital is 14,994, of which have died to December 31, 1759, 8,465.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Tour through the Whole Island of Great Britain</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1769, volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 121. A great many of these died, no doubt, after they had left the Hospital.</p>
			<p class="note-header"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Planta</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2665">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>The reference is no doubt to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Joseph Planta, Assistant-Librarian of the British Museum 1773, Principal Librarian 1799⁠–⁠1827. See Edwards’ <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives of the Founders of the British Museum</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 517 sqq.; and Nichols’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Illustrations of Literature</i>, volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 677⁠–⁠8.</p>
			<p class="note-header">“Unitarian”</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 408, note 1.)</p>
			<p>John Locke in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Second Vindication of the Reasonableness of Christianity</i> quotes from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edwards whom he answers:⁠—“This gentleman and his fellows are resolved to be Unitarians; they are for one article of faith as well as One person in the Godhead.”⁠—Locke’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Works</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1824, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, 200.</p>
			<p class="note-header">The proposed Riding School for Oxford</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 424.)</p>
			<p>My friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> C. E. Doble, has pointed out to me the following passage in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collectanea</i>, First Series, edited by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> C. R. L. Fletcher, Fellow of All Souls College, and printed for the Oxford Historical Society, Oxford, 1885.</p>
			<p>“The ‘Advertisement to Religion and Policy’, by Edward Earl of Clarendon, runs as follows:⁠—</p>
			<p>‘Henry Viscount Cornbury, who was called up to the House of Peers by the title of Lord Hyde, in the lifetime of his father, <a id="VI-page-li"/>Henry Earl of Rochester, by a codicil to his will, dated <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 10, 1751, left diverse <abbr>MSS.</abbr> of his great grandfather, Edward Earl of Clarendon, to Trustees, with a direction that the money to arise from the sale or publication thereof, should be employed as a beginning of a fund for supporting a Manage or Academy for riding and other useful exercises in Oxford; a plan of this sort having been also recommended by Lord Clarendon in his Dialogue on Education. Lord Cornbury dying before his father, this bequest did not take effect. But Catharine, one of the daughters of Henry Earl of Rochester, and late Duchess Dowager of Queensbury, whose property these <abbr>MSS.</abbr> became, afterwards by deed gave them, together with all the monies which had arisen or might arise from the sale or publication of them, to [three Trustees] upon trust for the like purposes as those expressed by Lord Hyde in his codicil.’</p>
			<p>“The preface to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Edward Earl of Clarendon, written by himself</i>, has words To the Same.<!-- recipient -->effect. (See also <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes and Queries</i>, Ser. I. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> 185, and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> 32.)</p>
			<p>“From a letter in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes and Queries</i>, Ser. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 74, it appears that in 1860 the available sum, in the hands of the Trustees of the Clarendon Bequest, amounted to £10,000. The University no longer needed a riding-school, and the claims of Physical Science were urgent; and in 1872 the announcement was made, that by the liberality of the Clarendon Trustees an additional wing had been added to the University Museum, containing the lecture-rooms and laboratories of the department of Experimental Philosophy.” Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 305.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Boswell and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rudd.</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2789">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>In <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Alfred Morrison’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collection of Autographs</i>, volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 103, mention is made among Boswell’s autographs of verses entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Lurgan Clanbrassil</i>, a supposed Irish song.”</p>
			<p>I have learnt, through <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morrison’s kindness, that “on the document itself there is the following memorandum, signed, so far as can be made out, H. W. R.:⁠—</p>
			<p id="VI-page-lii">‘The enclosed song was written and composed by James Boswell, the biographer of Johnson, in commemoration of a tour he made with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rudd whilst she was under his protection, for living with whom he displeased his father so much that he threatened to disinherit him.</p>
			<p>‘<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rudd had lived with one of the Perreaus, who were tried and executed for forgery. She was tried at the same time and acquitted.</p>
			<p>‘My father having heard that Boswell used to sing this song at the Home<br/>
			Circuit, requested it of him, and he wrote it and gave it him. H.W. R.’ ”</p>
			<p>‘<abbr>Feb.</abbr> 1828.’</p>
			<p>Christopher Smart.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 454, note 3.)</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Robert Browning, in his Parleyings with Christopher Smart, under the similitude of “some huge house,” thus describes the general run of that unfortunate poet’s verse:⁠—</p>
			<p>“All showed the Golden Mean without a hint<br/>
			Of brave extravagance that breaks the rule.<br/>
			The master of the mansion was no fool<br/>
			Assuredly, no genius just as sure!<br/>
			Safe mediocrity had scorned the lure<br/>
			Of now too much and now too little cost,<br/>
			And satisfied me sight was never lost<br/>
			Of moderate design’s accomplishment<br/>
			In calm completeness.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Browning goes on to liken one solitary poem to a Chapel in the house, in which is found⁠—</p>
			<p>“from floor to roof one evidence<br/>
			Of how far earth may rival heaven.”</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Parleyings with certain People of Importance in their Day</i> (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 80⁠–⁠82), London, 1887.</p>
			<p class="note-header" id="VI-page-liii">Johnson’s discussion on baptism⁠—with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lloyd, the Birmingham Quaker.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 458.)</p>
			<p>In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Farm and its Inhabitants</i> (see <a href="addenda.xhtml#VI-page-xlii">here</a>), a further account is given of the controversy between Johnson and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lloyd the Quaker, on the subject of Barclay’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Apology</i>.</p>
			<p>“Tradition states that, losing his temper, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson threw the volume<br/>
			on the floor, and put his foot on it, in denunciation of its statements.<br/>
			The identical volume is now in the possession of G. B. Lloyd, of Edgbaston<br/>
			Grove.</p>
			<p>“At the dinner table he continued the debate in such angry tones, and struck the table so violently that the children were frightened, and desired to escape.</p>
			<p>“The next morning see <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson went to the bank [<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lloyd was a banker] and by way of apology called out in his stentorian voice, ‘I say, Lloyd, I’m the best theologian, but you are the best Christian.’” <abbr>p.</abbr> 41. It could not have been “the next morning” that Johnson went to the bank, for he left for Lichfield on the evening of the day of the controversy (<a href="part-2.xhtml#II-page-461">here</a>). He must have gone in the afternoon, while Boswell was away seeing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boulton’s great works at Soho (ib. <abbr>p.</abbr> 459).</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> G. B. Lloyd, the great-grandson of Johnson’s host, in a letter written this summer (1886), says: “Having spent much of my boyhood with my grandfather in the old house, I have heard him tell the story of the stamping on the broad volume.”</p>
			<p>Boswell mentions (ib. <abbr>p.</abbr> 457) that “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lloyd, like their Majesties, had been blessed with a numerous family of fine children, their numbers being exactly the same.” The author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Farm and its Inhabitants</i> says (<abbr>p.</abbr> 46): “There is a tradition that when Sampson Lloyd’s wife used to feel depressed by the care of such a large family (they had sixteen children) he would say to her, ‘Never mind, the twentieth will be the most welcome.’ ” His fifteenth child Catharine married <abbr>Dr.</abbr> George Birkbeck, the founder of the Mechanics’ Institutes (ib. <abbr>p.</abbr> 48).</p>
			<p>A story told (<abbr>p.</abbr> 50) of one of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lloyd’s sons-in-law, Joseph Biddle, is an instance of that excess of forgetfulness which <a id="VI-page-liv"/>Johnson called “morbid oblivion” (see Boswell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i> <!-- <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 68 -->). “He went to pay a call in Leamington. The servant asked him for his name, he could not remember it; in perplexity he went away, when a friend in the street met him and accosted him, ‘How do you do, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Biddle?’ ‘Oh, Biddle, Biddle, Biddle, that’s the name,’ cried he, and rushed off to pay his call.”</p>
			<p>The editor is in error in stating (<abbr>p.</abbr> 45, note 1) that a very poor poem entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">A bone for Friend Mary to pick</i>, is by Johnson. It may be found in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i> for 1791, <abbr>p.</abbr> 948.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Lichfield in 1783.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 461.)</p>
			<p>C. P. Moritz, a young Prussian clergyman who published an account of a pedestrian tour that he made in England in the year 1782, thus describes Lichfield as he saw it on a day in June:⁠—</p>
			<p>“At noon I got to Lichfield, an old-fashioned town with narrow dirty streets, where for the first time I saw round panes of glass in the windows. The place to me wore an unfriendly appearance; I therefore made no use of my recommendation, but went straight through and only bought some bread at a baker’s, which I took along with me.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in England in 1782</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 140, by C. P. Moritz. Cassell’s National Library, 1886.</p>
			<p>The “recommendation” was an introduction to an inn given him by the daughter of his landlord at Sutton, who told him “that the people in Lichfield were, in general, very proud.” Travelling as he did, on foot and without luggage, he was looked upon with suspicion at the inns, and often rudely refused lodging.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Richard Baxter’s doubt</p>
			<p>(See <a href="part-2.xhtml#II-page-477">here</a>.)</p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> J. Hamilton Davies [See <a href="addenda.xhtml#VI-page-xlix">here</a>] informs me that there can be no doubt that Johnson referred to the following passage in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reliquiae Baxterianae</i>, folio edition of 1696, <abbr>p.</abbr> 127:⁠—</p>
			<p id="VI-page-lv">“This is another thing which I am changed in; that whereas in my younger days I was never tempted to doubt of the Truth of Scripture or Christianity, but all my Doubts and Fears were exercised at home, about my own Sincerity and Interest in Christ⁠—since then my sorest assaults have been on the other side, and such they were, that had I been void of internal Experience, and the adhesion of Love, and the special help of God, and had not discerned more Reason for my Religion than I did when I was younger, I had certainly apostatized to Infidelity,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>Johnson, the day after he recorded his “doubt,” wrote that he was “troubled with Baxter’s <em>scruple</em>“ (see <a href="part-2.xhtml#II-page-477">here</a>). The “scruple” was, perhaps, the same as the “doubt.” In his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i> he defines <q>scruple</q> as <q>doubt; difficulty of determination; perplexity; generally about minute things</q>.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Oxford in 1782</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2902">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> C. P. Moritz (<a href="addenda.xhtml#VI-page-liv">here</a>) gives a curious account of his visit to Oxford. On his way from Dorchester on the evening of a Sunday in June, he had been overtaken by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Maud, who seems to have been a Fellow and Tutor of Corpus College,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5555" id="noteref-5555" epub:type="noteref">5555</a> and who was returning from doing duty in his curacy. It was late when they arrived in the town. Moritz, who, as I have said, more than once had found great difficulty in getting a bed, had made up his mind to pass the summer night on a stonebench in the High Street. His comrade would not hear of this, but said that he would take him to an alehouse where “it is possible they mayn’t be gone to bed, and we may yet find company.” This alehouse was the Mitre.</p>
			<p>“We went on a few houses further, and then knocked at a door. It was then nearly twelve. They readily let us in; but how great was my astonishment when, on being shown into a room on the left, I saw a great number of clergymen, all with their gowns and bands on, sitting round a large table, each with his pot of beer before him. My travelling companion introduced me to them as a German clergyman, whom he could not sufficiently praise for my correct pronunciation of the Latin, my orthodoxy, and my good walking.</p>
			<p id="VI-page-lvi">“I now saw myself in a moment, as it were, all at once transported into the midst of a company, all apparently very respectable men, but all strangers to me. And it appeared to me extraordinary that I should thus at midnight be in Oxford, in a large company of Oxonian clergy, without well knowing how I had got there. Meanwhile, however, I took all the pains in my power to recommend myself to my company, and in the course of conversation I gave them as good an account as I could of our German universities, neither denying nor concealing that now and then we had riots and disturbances. ‘Oh, we are very unruly here, too,’ said one of the clergymen, as he took a hearty draught out of his pot of beer, and knocked on the table with his hand. The conversation now became louder, more general, and a little confused.⁠ ⁠… At last, when morning drew near, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Maud suddenly exclaimed, ‘D-n me, I must read prayers this morning at All Souls!’ ‘D-n me’ is an abbreviation of ‘G-d d-n me,’ which in England does not seem to mean more mischief or harm than any of our or their common expletives in conversation, such as ‘O gemini!’ or ‘The deuce take me!’⁠ ⁠… I am almost ashamed to own, that next morning, when I awoke, I had got so dreadful a headache from the copious and numerous toasts of my jolly and reverend friends that I could not possibly get up. —<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in England in 1782</i>, by C. P. Moritz, <abbr>p.</abbr> 123.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5556" id="noteref-5556" epub:type="noteref">5556</a></p>
			<p class="note-header"><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lettsom</p>
			<p>(Volume in, <abbr>p.</abbr> 68.)</p>
			<p>Boswell in an <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Ode to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charles Dilly</i>, published in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i> for 1791, <abbr>p.</abbr> 367, says that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lettsom “Refutes pert Priestley’s nonsense.”</p>
			<p class="note-header">William Vachell</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3103">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> George Parker of the Bodleian Library informs me that William Vachell had been tutor to Prince Esterhazy, and that for many years he held the appointment of “Pumper,” or Lessee of the baths at Bath. In 1776 and 1777 he paid as rental for them to the Corporation £525. He died on November 26, 1789. According to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ivor Vachell (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 327), it was his eldest son who signed the Round Robin.</p>
			<p class="note-header" id="VI-page-lvii">Johnson and Baretti.</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3142">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>Baretti in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tolondron</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 145, gives an account of a difference between himself and Johnson. Johnson sent to ask him to call on him, but Baretti was leaving town. When he returned the time for a reconciliation had passed, for Johnson was dead.</p>
			<p class="note-header">English pulpit eloquence</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 248.)</p>
			<p>“Upon the whole, which is preferable, the philosophic method of the English, or the rhetoric of the French preachers? The first (though less glorious) is certainly safer for the preacher. It is difficult for a man to make himself ridiculous, who proposes only to deliver plain sense on a subject he has thoroughly studied. But the instant he discovers the least pretensions towards the sublime or the pathetic, there is no medium; we must either admire or laugh; and there are so many various talents requisite to form the character of an orator that it is more than probable we shall laugh.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Edward Gibbon</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1827, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 118.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Bishop Percy’s communications to Boswell relative to Johnson</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3669">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>“James Boswell To Bishop Percy.<!-- recipient --></p>
			<p>‘9 April, 1790.</p>
			<p>‘As to suppressing your Lordship’s name when relating the very few anecdotes of Johnson with which you have favoured me, I will do anything to oblige your Lordship but that very thing. I owe to the authenticity of my work, to its respectability, and to the credit of my illustrious friends [? friend] to introduce as many names of eminent persons as I can⁠ ⁠… Believe me, my Lord, you are not the only bishop in the number of great men with which my pages are graced. I am quite resolute as to this matter.’ “⁠—Nichols’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Literary History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 313.</p>
			<p class="note-header" id="VI-page-lviii">Sir Thomas Brown’s remark “Do the devils lie? No; for then Hell could not subsist.”</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 293.)</p>
			<p>This remark, whether it is Brown’s or not, may have been suggested by Milton’s lines in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Paradise Lost</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> 496⁠–⁠9, or might have suggested them:⁠—</p>
			<p>“O shame to men! devil with devil damn’d<br/>
			Firm concord holds, men only disagree<br/>
			Of creatures rational.”</p>
			<p class="note-header">Johnson on the advantages of having a profession or business</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3769">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson was of opinion that the happiest as well as the most virtuous persons were to be found amongst those who united with a business or profession a love of literature.”⁠—<b epub:type="z3998:surname">Seward</b>’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Biographiana</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 599.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Johnson’s trips to the country</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 453.)</p>
			<p>I have omitted to mention Johnson’s visit to ’Squire Dilly’s mansion at Southill in June, 1781 (see <a href="part-4.xhtml#IV-page-118">here</a> to <a href="part-4.xhtml#IV-page-132">here</a>).</p>
			<p class="note-header">Citations of living authors in Johnson’s Dictionary</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4240">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>Johnson cites <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Irene</i> under <q>impostures</q>, and Lord Lyttelton under <q>twist</q>.</p>
			<p class="note-header" id="VI-page-lix"><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Parr’s evening with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 15.)</p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> John Rigaud, B.D., Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, has kindly sent me the following anecdote of the meeting of Johnson and Parr:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I remember <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Routh, the old President of Magdalen, telling me of an interview and conversation between <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Parr, in the course of which the former made use of some expression respecting the latter, which considerably wounded and offended him. ‘Sir,’ he said to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, ‘you know that what you have just said will be known in four-and-twenty hours over this vast metropolis.’ Upon which <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s manner altered, his eye became calm, and he put out his hand, and said, ‘Forgive me, Parr, I didn’t quite mean it.’ ‘But,’ said the President, with an amused and amusing look, ‘<em>I never could get him to tell me what it was <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson had said!</em>’ He spoke of seeing <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson going up the steps into University College, dressed, I think, in a snuff-coloured coat.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Martin Joseph Routh, who was President of Magdalen College for sixty-four years, was born in 1755 and died on December 22, 1854.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="la">Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris</i>.”</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4799">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>Malone’s note on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Rape of Lucrece</i> must have been, not as I conjectured on line 1111, but on lines 1581⁠–⁠2:⁠—</p>
			<p>“It easeth some, though none it ever cured,<br/>
			To think their dolour others have endured.”</p>
			<p>With these lines may be compared Satan’s speech in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Paradise Regained</i>,<br/>
			Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, lines 399⁠–⁠402:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Long since with woe<br/>
			Nearer acquainted, now I feel by proof,<br/>
			That fellowship in pain divides not smart,<br/>
			Nor lightens aught each man’s peculiar load.”</p>
			<p class="note-header" id="VI-page-lx">Richard Baxter’s rule of preaching.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 185.)</p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> J. Hamilton Davies [See <a href="addenda.xhtml#VI-page-xlix">here</a>] has furnished me with the following extract from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reliquiae Baxterianae</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1696, <abbr>p.</abbr> 93, in illustration of Johnson’s statement:⁠—</p>
			<p>“And yet I did usually put in something in my Sermon which was above their own discovery, and which they had not known before; and this I did, that they might be kept humble, and still perceive their ignorance, and be willing to keep in a learning state. (For when Preachers tell their People of no more than they know, and do not show that they excel them in knowledge, and easily overtop them in Abilities, the People will be tempted to turn Preachers themselves, and think that they have learnt all that the Ministers can teach them, and are as wise as they⁠⸻). And this I did also to increase their knowledge; and also to make Religion pleasant to them, by a daily addition to their former Sight, and to draw them on with desire and Delight.”</p>
			<p class="note-header">Opposition to Sir Joshua Reynolds in the Royal Academy</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4906">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>“James Boswell <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, To Bishop Percy.<!-- recipient --> 12 March, 1790.</p>
			<p>“Sir Joshua has been shamefully used by a junto of the Academicians.<br/>
			I live a great deal with him, and he is much better than you would<br/>
			suppose.”<br/>
			—Nichols’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Literary History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 313.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Richard Baxter on the possible salvation of a Suicide.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 225.)</p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> J. Hamilton Davies writes to me that “<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s quotation about suicide must surely be wrong. I have no recollection in any of Baxter’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Works</i> of such a statement, and it is in direct contradiction to all that is known of his sentiments. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Davies sends me the following passage, which possibly Johnson might have very imperfectly remembered:⁠—</p>
			<p>“The commonest cause [of suicide] is melancholy, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Though there be much more hope of the salvation of such as want the use of <a id="VI-page-lxi"/>their understandings, because so far it may be called involuntary, yet it is a very dreadful case, especially so far as reason remaineth in any power.”⁠—Baxter’s _Christian Directory, edited by Orme, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 138.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Haslitt’s report of Baxter’s Sermon</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4930">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> J. Hamilton Davies tells me that he “entirely disbelieves that Baxter said, ‘Hell was paved with infants’ skulls.’ The same thing, or something very like it, has been said of Calvin, but I could never,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Davies continues, “find it in his Works.” He kindly sends me the following extract from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reliquiae Baxterianae</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1696, <abbr>p.</abbr> 24:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Once all the ignorant Rout were raging mad against me for preaching the Doctrine of Original Sin to them, and telling them that Infants before Regeneration had so much Guilt and Corruption, as made them loathsome in the Eyes of God: whereupon they vented it abroad in the Country, That I preached that God hated, or loathed Infants; so that they railed at me as I passed through the streets. The next Lord’s Day, I cleared and confirmed it, and showed them that if this were not true, their Infants had no need of Christ, of Baptism, or of Renewing by the Holy Ghost. And I asked them whether they durst say that their Children were saved without a Saviour, and were no Christians, and why they baptized them, with much more to that purpose, and afterwards they were ashamed and as mute as fishes.”</p>
			<p class="note-header">Johnson on an actor’s transformation</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 244.)</p>
			<p>Boswell in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Remarks on the Profession of a Player</i> (Essay <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>), first printed in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">London Magazine</i> for 1770, says:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I remember to have heard the most illustrious author of this age say: ‘If, Sir, Garrick believes himself to be every character that he represents he is a madman, and ought to be confined. Nay, Sir, he is a villain, and ought to be hanged. If, for instance, he believes himself to be Macbeth he has committed murder, he is a vile assassin who, in violation of the laws of hospitality as <a id="VI-page-lxii"/>well as of other principles, has imbrued his hands in the blood of his King while he was sleeping under his roof. If, Sir, he has really been that person in his own mind, he has in his own mind been as guilty as Macbeth.’ “⁠—Nichols’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Literary History</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1848, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 373.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Sir John Flayer “On the Asthma.”</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 353.)</p>
			<p>Johnson, writing from Ashbourne to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brocklesby on July 20, 1784, says: “I am now looking into Floyer who lived with his asthma to almost his ninetieth year.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Samuel Timmins, the author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson in Birmingham</i>, informs me that he and two friends of his lately found in Lichfield a Lending Book of the Cathedral Library. Among the entries for 1784 was: “<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sir John Floyer on the Asthma</i>, lent to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson.” Johnson, no doubt, had taken the book with him to Ashbourne.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Timmins says that the entries in this Lending Book unfortunately do not begin till about 1760 (or later). “If,” he adds, “the earlier Lending Book could be found, it would form a valuable clue to books which Johnson may have borrowed in his youth and early manhood.”</p>
			<p class="note-header">Boswell’s expectations from Burke</p>
			<p>(see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4922">this note</a>; and <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5034">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>Boswell, in May 1783, mentioned to Johnson his “expectations from the interest of an eminent person then in power.” The two following extracts from letters written by him show what some of these expectations had been.</p>
			<p>“James Boswell <abbr>Esq.</abbr> To James Abercrombie <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, of Philadelphia.<br/>
			“July 28,1793.</p>
			<p>“I have a great wish to see America; and I once flattered myself that<br/>
			I should be sent thither in a station of some importance.”<br/>
			Nichols’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Literary History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 317.</p>
			<p>Boswell had written to Burke on March 3, 1778: “Most heartily do I rejoice that our present ministers have at last yielded to conciliation (see <a href="part-3.xhtml#III-page-221">here</a>). <a id="VI-page-lxiii"/>For amidst all the sanguinary zeal of my countrymen, I have professed myself a friend to our fellow-subjects in America, so far as they claim an exemption from being taxed by the representatives of the King’s British subjects. I do not perfectly agree with you; for I deny the declaratory act, and I am a warm Tory in its true constitutional sense. I wish I were a commissioner, or one of the secretaries of the commission for the grand treaty. I am to be in London this spring, and if his Majesty should ask me what I would choose, my answer will be to assist at the compact between Britain and America.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Burke’s Correspondence</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> 209.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Boswelf’s intention to attend on Johnson in his illness, and to publish “Praises’ of him.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 265.)</p>
			<p>“James Boswell <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, To Bishop Percy.<!-- recipient --></p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, 8 March, 1784.</p>
			<p>‘… I intend to be in London about the end of this month, chiefly to attend upon see <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson with respectful affection. He has for some time been very ill⁠ ⁠… I wish to publish as a regale [see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3767">this note</a>; and Boswell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i> <!-- <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 347, note 1 -->] to him a neat little volume, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Praises of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, by contemporary Writers</i>.⁠ ⁠… Will your Lordship take the trouble to send me a note of the writers you recollect having praised our much respected friend?⁠ ⁠… An edition of my pamphlet [<a href="part-4.xhtml#IV-page-258">here</a>] has been published in London.’ ”⁠—Nichols’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Literary History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 302.</p>
			<p class="note-header">The reported Russian version of the “Rambler’</p>
			<p>(See <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5084">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>I am informed by my friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> W. R. Morfill, M.A., of Oriel College, Oxford, who has, I suppose, no rival in this country in his knowledge of the Slavonic tongues, that no Russian translation of the Rambler has been published. He has given me the <a id="VI-page-lxiv"/>following title of the Russian version of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rasselas</i>, which he has obtained for me through the kindness of Professor Grote, of the University of Warsaw:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Rasselas, printz Abissinskii, Vostochnaya Poviest Sochinenie Doktora<br/>
			Dzhonsona Perevod s’angliiskago. 3 chasti, Moskva. 1795.</p>
			<p>“Rasselas, prince of Abyssinia, An Eastern Tale, by Doctor Johnson.<br/>
			Translated from the English. 2 parts, Moscow, 1795.”</p>
			<p class="note-header">“It has not wit enough to keep it sweet.”</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 320.)</p>
			<p>“Heylyn, in the Epistle to his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Letter-Combate</i>, addressing Baxter, and speaking of such ‘unsavoury pieces of wit and mischief’ as ‘the <em>Church-historian</em>’ asks, ‘Would you not have me rub them with a little salt to keep them sweet?’ This passage was surely present in the mind of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson when he said concerning <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Rehearsal</i> that ‘it had not wit enough to keep it sweet.’ ”⁠—J. E. Bailey’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Thomas Fuller</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 640.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Pictures of Johnson</p>
			<p>(see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5505">this note</a>.)</p>
			<p>In the Common Room of Trinity College, Oxford, there is an interesting portrait of Johnson, said to be by Romney. I cannot, however, find any mention of it in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i> of that artist. It was presented to the College by Canon Duckworth.</p>
			<p class="note-header">The Gregory Family</p>
			<p>(See Boswell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i> <!-- Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 48, note 3 -->.)</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> P. J. Anderson (in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes and Queries</i>, 7th S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> 147) casts some doubt on Chalmers’ statement. He gives a genealogical table of the Gregory family, which includes thirteen professors; but two of these cannot, from their dates, be reckoned among Chalmers’ sixteen.</p>
			<p class="note-header" id="VI-page-lxv">The University of <abbr>St.</abbr> Andrews in 1778.</p>
			<p>(See Boswell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i> <!-- Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 63, note 2 -->.)</p>
			<p>In the preface to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Poems by George Monck Berkeley</i>, it is recorded (<abbr>p.</abbr> cccxlviii) that when “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berkeley entered at the University of <abbr>St.</abbr> Andrews [about 1778], one of the college officers called upon him to deposit a crown to pay for the windows he might break. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berkeley said, that as he should reside in his father’s house, it was little likely he should break any windows, having never, that he remembered, broke one in his life. He was assured that he <em>would</em> do it at <abbr>St.</abbr> Andrews. On the rising of the session several of the students said, ‘Now for the windows. Come, it is time to set off, let us sally forth!’ <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berkeley, being called upon, enquired what was to be done? They replied, ‘Why, to break every window in college.’ ‘For what reason?’ ‘Oh! no reason; but that it has always been done from time immemorial.’ ” The Editor goes on to say that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berkeley prevailed on them to give up the practice. How poor some of the students were is shown by the following anecdote, told by the College Porter, who had to collect the crowns. “I am just come,” he said, “from a poor student indeed. I went for the window <em>croon</em>; he cried, begged, and prayed not to pay it, saying, ‘he brought but a croon to keep him all the session, and he had spent sixpence of it; so I have got only four and sixpence.’ ” His father, a labourer, who owned three cows, “had sold one to dress his son for the University, and put the lamented croon in his pocket to purchase coals. All the lower students study by firelight. He had brought with him a large tub of oatmeal and a pot of salted butter, on which he was to subsist from <abbr>Oct.</abbr> 20 until May 20.” Berkeley raised “a very noble subscription” for the poor fellow.</p>
			<p>In another passage (<abbr>p.</abbr> cxcviii) it is recorded that Berkeley “boasted to his father, ‘Well, Sir, idle as you may think me, I never have once bowed at any Professor’s Lecture.’ An explanation being requested of the word <q>bowing</q>, it was thus given: ‘Why, if any poor fellow has been a little idle, and is not prepared to speak when called upon by the Professor, he gets up and makes a respectful-bow, and sits down again.’ ” Berkeley was a grandson of Bishop Berkeley.</p>
			<p class="note-header" id="VI-page-lxvi">Johnson’s unpublished sermons.</p>
			<p>(see Boswell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i> <!-- Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 67, note 1 -->)</p>
			<p>“James Boswell <abbr>Esq.</abbr> To James Abercrombie <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, of Philadelphia.</p>
			<p>“June 11, 1792.</p>
			<p>‘I have not yet been able to discover any more of Johnson’s sermons besides those left for publication by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor. I am informed by the Lord Bishop of Salisbury, that he gave an excellent one to a clergyman, who preached and published it in his own name on some public occasion. But the Bishop has not as yet told me the name, and seems unwilling to do it. Yet I flatter myself I shall get at it.’ ”⁠—Nichols’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Literary History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 315.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Tillotson’s argument against the doctrine of transubstantiation.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 71.)</p>
			<p>Gibbon, writing of his reconversion from Roman Catholicism to Protestantism in the year 1754, after allowing something to the conversation of his Swiss tutor, says:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I must observe that it was principally effected by my private reflections; and I still remember my solitary transport at the discovery of a philosophical argument against the doctrine of transubstantiation⁠—<em>that</em> the text of scripture which seems to inculcate the real presence is attested only by a single sense⁠—our sight; while the real presence itself is disproved by three of our senses⁠—the sight, the touch, and the taste.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Edward Gibbon</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1827, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 67.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Jean Pierre de Crousaz</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 80.)</p>
			<p>Gibbon, describing his education at Lausanne, says:⁠—“The principles of philosophy were associated with the examples of taste; and by a singular chance the book as well as the man which contributed the most effectually to my education has a stronger claim on my gratitude than on my <a id="VI-page-lxvii"/>admiration. M. de Crousaz, the adversary of Bayle and Pope, is not distinguished by lively fancy or profound reflection; and even in his own country, at the end of a few years, his name and writings are almost obliterated. But his philosophy had been formed in the school of Locke, his divinity in that of Limborch and Le Clerc; in a long and laborious life several generations of pupils were taught to think and even to write; his lessons rescued the Academy of Lausanne from Calvinistic prejudice; and he had the rare merit of diffusing a more liberal spirit among the clergy and people of the Pays de Vaud.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Edward Gibbon</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1827, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 66.</p>
			<p class="note-header">The new pavement in London.</p>
			<p>(see Boswell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i> <!-- Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 84, note 3 -->.)</p>
			<p>“By an Act passed in 1766, “For the better cleansing, paving, and enlightning the City of London and Liberties thereof”, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, powers are granted in pursuance of which the great streets have been paved with whyn-quarry stone, or rock-stone, or stone of a flat surface.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Tour through the whole Island of Great Britain</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1769, volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 121.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Boswell’s Projected Works.</p>
			<p>(see Boswell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i> <!-- Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 91, note 2 -->.)</p>
			<p>To this list should be added an account of a Tour to the Isle of Man (see <a href="part-3.xhtml#III-page-80">here</a>).</p>
			<p class="note-header">A cancel in the first edition of Boswell’s “Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides”</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 151.)</p>
			<p>In my note on the suppression of offensive passages in the second edition of Boswell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i> (see <a href="part-V.xhtml#V-page-148">here</a>), I mention that Rowlandson in one of his caricatures paints Boswell begging Sir Alexander Macdonald for mercy, while on the ground lie pages 165, 167, torn out. I have discovered, though too late to mention in the proper place, that in the first edition the leaf containing pages 167, 168, was really cancelled. In my own copy I noticed between pages 168 see <a id="VI-page-lxviii"/>and 169 a narrow projecting slip of paper. I found the same in the copy in the British Museum. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Horace Hart, the printer to the University, who has kindly examined my copy, informs me that the leaf was cancelled after the sheets had been stitched together. It was cut out, but an edge was left to which the new one was attached by paste. The leaf thus treated begins with the words “talked with very high respect” (<a href="part-V.xhtml#V-page-149">here</a>) and ends “This day was little better than a blank” (see <a href="part-V.xhtml#V-page-151">here</a>). This conclusion was perhaps meant to be significant to the observant reader.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Boswell’s conversation with the King about the title proper to be given to the Young Pretender.</p>
			<p>(see Boswell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i> <!-- Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 185, note 4 -->.)</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lort wrote to Bishop Percy on <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 15, 1785:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Boswell’s book [<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Tour to the Hebrides</i>], I suppose, will be out in the winter. The King at his levée talked to him, as was natural, on this subject. Boswell told his majesty that he had another work on the anvil⁠—a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Rebellion in 1745</i> (see <a href="part-3.xhtml#III-page-162">here</a>); but that he was at a loss how to style the principal person who figured in it. ‘How would you style him, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boswell?’ ‘I was thinking, Sire, of calling him the grandson of the unfortunate James the Second.’ ‘That I have no objection to; my title to the Crown stands on firmer ground⁠—on an Act of Parliament.’ This is said to be the <em>substance</em> of a conversation which passed at the levée. I wish I was certain of the exact words.”⁠—Nichols’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Literary History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> 472.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Shakespeare’s popularity</p>
			<p>(see Boswell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i> <!-- Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 244, note 2 -->.)</p>
			<p>Gibbon, after describing how he used to attend Voltaire’s private theatre at Monrepos in 1757 and 1758, continues:⁠—</p>
			<p>“The habits of pleasure fortified my taste for the French theatre, and that taste has perhaps abated my idolatry for the gigantic genius of Shakespeare, which is inculcated from our infancy as the first duty of an Englishman.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Edward Gibbon</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1837, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 90.</p>
			<p class="note-header" id="VI-page-lxix">Archibald Campbell.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 357.)</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> C. E. Doble informs me that in the Bodleian Library “there is a characteristic letter of Archibald Campbell in a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Francis Lee</i> in Rawlinson, J., 4to. 2. 197; and also a skeleton life of him in Rawlinson, J., 4to. 5. 301.”</p>
			<p class="note-header">Cocoa Tree Club.</p>
			<p>(see Boswell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i> <!-- Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 386, note 1 -->.)</p>
			<p>Gibbon records in his Journal on November 24, 1762, a visit to the Cocoa<br/>
			Tree Club:⁠—</p>
			<p>“That respectable body, of which I have the honour of being a member, affords every evening a sight truly English. Twenty or thirty, perhaps, of the first men in the kingdom in point of fashion and fortune, supping at little tables covered with a napkin, in the middle of a coffee-room, upon a bit of cold meat or a sandwich, and drinking a glass of punch. At present we are full of king’s counsellors and lords of the bedchamber, who, having jumped into the ministry, make a very singular medley of their old principles and language with their modern ones.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Edward Gibbon</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1827, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 131.</p>
			<p class="note-header">Johnson’s use of the word “big’</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 425.)</p>
			<p>On volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, page 471, Johnson says: “Don’t, Sir, accustom yourself to use big words for little matters.”</p>
			<p class="note-header">Atlas, the Duke of Devonshire’s racehorse.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 429.)</p>
			<p>Johnson, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary of a Journey into North Wales</i>, records on<br/>
			July 12, 1774:⁠—</p>
			<p>“At Chatsworth⁠ ⁠… , Atlas, fifteen hands inch and half.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Duppa in a note on this, says: “A racehorse, which attracted so much of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s attention, that he said, ‘of all the Duke’s possessions I like Atlas best.’ ”</p>
			<p id="VI-page-lxx">Thomas Holcroft, who in childhood wandered far and wide with his father, a pedlar, was at Nottingham during the race-week of the year 1756 or 1757, and saw in its youth the horse which Johnson so much admired in its old age. He says: “The great and glorious part which Nottingham held in the annals of racing this year, arose from the prize of the King’s plate, which was to be contended for by the two horses which everybody I heard speak considered as undoubtedly the best in England, and perhaps equal to any that had ever been known, Childers alone excepted. Their names were Careless and Atlas..⁠ ⁠… There was a story in circulation that Atlas, on account of his size and clumsiness, had been banished to the cart-breed; till by some accident, either of playfulness or fright, several of them started together; and his vast advantage in speed happening to be noticed, he was restored to his blood companions..⁠ ⁠… Alas for the men of Nottingham, Careless was conquered. I forget whether it was at two or three heats, but there was many an empty purse on that night, and many a sorrowful heart.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Thomas Holcroft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 70.</p>
			<p>Sir Richard Clough.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 436.)</p>
			<p>There is an interesting note on Sir Richard Clough, the founder of Bâch y Graig, in Professor Rhys’s edition of Pennant’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tours in Wales</i> (volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 137). The Professor writes to me:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Sir Richard Clough’s wealth was so great that it became a saying of the people in North Wales that a man who grew very wealthy was or had become a Clough. This has long been forgotten; but it is still said in Welsh, in North Wales, that a very rich man is a regular <i xml:lang="cy">clwch</i>, which is pronounced with the guttural spirant, which was then (in the 16th century) sounded in English, just as the English word <q>draught</q> (of drink) is in Welsh <i xml:lang="cy">dracht</i> pronounced nearly as if it were German.”</p>
			<p class="note-header" id="VI-page-lxxi">Evan Evans.</p>
			<p>(Volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 443.)</p>
			<p>Evan Evans, who is described as being “incorrigibly addicted to strong drink,” was Curate of Llanvair Talyhaern, in Denbighshire, and author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Some Specimens of the Poetry of Antient Welsh Bards translated into English</i>. London, R. &amp; J. Dodsley, 1764. My friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morfill informs me that he remembers to have seen it stated in a manuscript note in a book in the Bodleian, that “Evan Evans would have written much more if he had not been so much given up to the bottle.”</p>
			<p>Gray thus mentions Evan Evans in a letter to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Wharton, written in<br/>
			July, 1760:⁠—</p>
			<p>“The Welsh Poets are also coming to light. I have seen a discourse in <abbr>MS.</abbr> about them (by one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Evans, a clergyman) with specimens of their writings. This is in Latin; and though it don’t approach the other [Macpherson], there are fine scraps among it.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Works of Thomas Gray</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> John Mitford. London, 1858, volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 250.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
