<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix XVIII: Miss Burney’s Account of Johnson’s Last Days</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="appendix-18" epub:type="appendix">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Appendix</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Miss Burney’s Account of Johnson’s Last Days</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p>(Page 399.)</p>
				<p id="IV-page-439">Miss Burney’s account of Johnson’s last days is interesting, but her dates are confused more even than is common with her. I have corrected them as well as I can.</p>
				<p>“<abbr>Dec.</abbr> 9. He will not, it seems, be talked to⁠—at least very rarely. At times indeed he reanimates; but it is soon over and he says of himself:⁠—‘I am now like Macbeth⁠—question enrages me.’ ”</p>
				<p>“<abbr>Dec.</abbr> 10. At night my father brought us the most dismal tidings of dear <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson. He had thanked and taken leave of all his physicians. Alas! I shall lose him, and he will take no leave of me. My father was deeply depressed. I hear from everyone he is now perfectly resigned to his approaching fate, and no longer in terror of death.”</p>
				<p>“<abbr>Dec.</abbr> 11. My father in the morning saw this first of men. He was up and very composed. He took his hand very kindly, asked after all his family, and then in particular how Fanny did. ‘I hope,’ he said, ‘Fanny did not take it amiss that I did not see her. I was very bad. Tell Fanny to pray for me.’ After which, still grasping his hand, he made a prayer for himself, the most fervent, pious, humble, eloquent, and touching, my father says, that ever was composed. Oh! would I had heard it! He ended it with Amen! in which my father joined, and was echoed by all present; and again, when my father was leaving him, he brightened up, something of his arch look returned, and he said: ‘I think I shall throw the ball at Fanny yet.’ ”</p>
				<p>“<abbr>Dec.</abbr> 12. [Miss Burney called at Bolt-court.] All the rest went away but a <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Davis, a good sort of woman, whom this truly charitable soul had sent for to take a dinner at his house. [See <i>ante</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 239, note 2.] <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton then came. He could not look at me, and I turned away from him. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Davis asked how the Doctor was. ‘Going on to death very fast,’ was his mournful answer. ‘Has he taken,’ said she, ‘anything?’ ‘Nothing at all. We carried him some bread and milk⁠—he refused it, and said:⁠—“The less the better.” ’ ”</i></p>
				<p>“<abbr>Dec.</abbr> 20. This day was the ever-honoured, ever-lamented <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson committed to the earth. Oh, how sad a day to me! My father attended. I could not keep my eyes dry all day; nor can I now in the recollecting it; but let me pass over what to mourn is now so vain.” <abbr>Mme.</abbr> D’Arblay’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 333⁠–⁠339.</i></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
