<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
	"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
	<title></title>
	<meta name="generator" content="BBEdit 14.0" />
</head>
<body>

<h2>APPENDIX A</h2>

<h3>JOHNSON'S DEBATES IN PARLIAMENT.</h3>

<p>(<i>Pages</i> 118 <i>and</i> 150.)</p>

<p>The publication of the 'Debates' in the <i>Gentleman's Magazine</i> began in
July 1732. The names of the speakers were not printed in full; Sir
Robert Walpole was disguised—if a disguise it can be called—as Sir
R——t W——le, and Mr. Pelham as Mr. P—lh—m. Otherwise the report was
open and avowed. During the first few years, however, it often happened
that no attempt was made to preserve the individuality of the members.
Thus in a debate on the number of seamen (<i>Gent. Mag</i>. v. 507), the
speeches of the 'eight chief speakers' were so combined as to form but
three. First come 'the arguments made use of for 30,000 men;' next, 'an
answer to the following effect;' and lastly, 'a reply that was in
substance as follows.' Each of these three speeches is in the first
person, though each is formed of the arguments of two members at least,
perhaps of many. In the report of a two days' debate in 1737, in which
there were fourteen chief speakers, the substance of thirteen of the
speeches was given in three (<i>ib</i>. vii. 746, 775). In July 1736 (<i>ib</i>.
vi. 363) we find the beginning of a great change. 'To satisfy the
impatience of his readers,' the publisher promises 'to give them
occasionally some entire speeches.' He prints one which likely enough
had been sent to him by the member who had spoken it, and adds that he
shall be 'grateful for any authentic intelligence in matters of such
importance and <i>tenderness</i> as the speeches in Parliament' (<i>ib</i>. p.
365). Cave, in his examination before the House of Lords on April 30,
1747, on a charge of having printed in the <i>Gentleman's Magazine</i> an
account of the trial of Lord Lovat, owned that 'he had had speeches sent
him by the members themselves, and had had assistance from some members
who have taken notes of other members' speeches' (<i>Parl. Hist</i>. xiv.
60).</p>

<p>It was chiefly in the numbers of the <i>Magazine</i> for the latter half of
each year that the publication took place. The parliamentary recess was
the busy time for reporters and printers. It was commonly believed that
the resolution on the Journals of the House of Commons against
publishing any of its proceedings was only in force while parliament was
sitting. But on April 13, 1738, it was unanimously resolved 'that it is
an high indignity to, and a notorious breach of the privilege of this
House to give any account of the debates, as well during the recess as
the sitting of parliament' (<i>Parl. Hist</i>. x. 812). It was admitted that
this privilege expired at the end of every parliament. When the
dissolution had come every one might publish what he pleased. With the
House of Lords it was far otherwise, for 'it is a Court of Record, and
as such its rights and privileges never die. It may punish a printer for
printing any part of its proceedings for thirty or forty years back'
(<i>ib</i>. p. 807). Mr. Winnington, when speaking to this resolution of
April 13, said that if they did not put a speedy stop to this practice
of reporting 'they will have every word that is spoken here by
<i>gentlemen</i> misrepresented by <i>fellows</i> who thrust themselves into our
gallery' (<i>ib</i>. p. 806). Walpole complained 'that he had been made to
speak the very reverse of what he meant. He had read debates wherein all
the wit, the learning, and the argument had been thrown into one side,
and on the other nothing but what was low, mean, and ridiculous' (<i>ib</i>.
p. 809). Later on, Johnson in his reports 'saved appearances tolerably
well; but took care that the WHIG DOGS should not have the best of it'
(Murphy's <i>Johnson</i>, p. 45).</p>

<p>It was but a few days after he became a contributor to the <i>Magazine</i>
that this resolution was passed. Parliament rose on May 20, and in the
June number the reports of the debates of the Senate of Lilliput began.
To his fertile mind was very likely due this humorous expedient by which
the resolution of the House was mocked. That he wrote the introduction
in which is narrated the voyage of Captain Gulliver's grandson to
Lilliputia can scarcely be doubted. It bears all the marks of his early
style. The Lords become Hurgoes, and the Commons Clinabs, Walpole
becomes Walelop, Pulteney Pulnub, and Pitt Ptit; otherwise the report is
much as it had been. At the end of the volume for 1739 was given a key
to all the names. The <i>London Magazine</i> had boldly taken the lead. In
the May number, which was published at the close of the month, and
therefore after parliament had risen, began the report of the
proceedings and debates of a political and learned club of young
noblemen and gentlemen, who hoped one day to enter parliament, and who
therefore, the better to qualify themselves for their high position,
only debated questions that were there discussed. To the speakers were
given the names of the ancient Greeks and Romans. Thus we find the Hon.
Marcus Cato and the Right Hon. M. Tullius Cicero. By the key that was
published in 1742 Cicero was seen to be Walpole, and Cato, Pulteney.
What risks the publishers and writers ran was very soon shown. In
December 1740 the ministers proposed to lay an embargo on various
articles of food. As the members entered the House a printed paper was
handed to each, entitled <i>Considerations upon the Embargo</i>. Adam Smith
had just gone up as a young student to the University of Oxford. There
are 'considerations' suggested in this paper which the great authority
of the author of the <i>Wealth of Nations</i> has not yet made pass current
as truths. The paper contained, moreover, charges of jobbery against
'great men,' though no one was named. It was at once voted a malicious
and scandalous libel, and the author, William Cooley, a scrivener, was
committed to Newgate. With him was sent the printer of the <i>Daily Post</i>,
in which part of the <i>Considerations</i> had been published. After seven
weeks' imprisonment in the depth of winter in that miserable den,
'without sufficient sustenance to support life,' Cooley was discharged
on paying his fees. He was in knowledge more than a hundred years before
his time, and had been made to suffer accordingly. The printer would
have been discharged also, but the fees were more than he could pay. Two
months later he petitioned for mercy. The fees by that time were £121.
His petition was not received, and he was kept in prison till the close
of the session (<i>Parl. Hist</i>. xi. 867-894).</p>

<p>Such were the risks run by Cave and Johnson and their fellow-workers.
That no prosecution followed was due perhaps to that dread of ridicule
which has often tempered the severity of the law. 'The Hurgolen Branard,
who in the former session was Pretor of Mildendo,' might well have been
unwilling to prove that he was Sir John Barnard, late Lord Mayor of
London.</p>

<p>Johnson, it should seem, revised some of the earliest <i>Debates</i>. In a
letter to Cave which cannot have been written later than September 1738,
he mentions the alterations that he had made (<i>ante</i>, p. 136). The more
they were written by him, the less authentic did they become, for he was
not one of those 'fellows who thrust themselves into the gallery of the
House.' His employer, Cave, if we can trust his own evidence, had been
in the habit of going there and taking notes with a pencil (<i>Parl.
Hist</i>. xiv. 60). But Johnson, Hawkins says (<i>Life</i>, p. 122), 'never was
within the walls of either House.' According to Murphy (<i>Life</i>, p. 44),
he had been inside the House of Commons once. Be this as it may, in the
end the <i>Debates</i> were composed by him alone (<i>ante</i>, p. 118). From that
time they must no longer be looked upon as authentic records, in spite
of the assertions of the Editor of the <i>Parl. Hist</i>. (xi. Preface).
Johnson told Boswell (<i>ante</i>, p. 118) 'that sometimes he had nothing
more communicated to him than the names of the several speakers, and the
part which they had taken in the debate;' sometimes 'he had scanty notes
furnished by persons employed to attend in both Houses of Parliament.'
Often, his Debates were written 'from no materials at all—the mere
coinage of his own imagination' (<i>post</i>, under Dec. 9, 1784).</p>

<p>'He never wrote any part of his works with equal velocity. Three columns
of the <i>Magazine</i> in an hour was no uncommon effort, which was faster
than most persons could have transcribed that quantity' (<i>ib</i>.).
According to Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 99), 'His practice was to shut himself
up in a room assigned to him at St. John's Gate, to which he would not
suffer any one to approach, except the compositor or Cave's boy for
matter, which, as fast as he composed it, he tumbled out at the door.'</p>

<p>From Murphy we get the following curious story:—</p>

<p>'That Johnson was the author of the debates during that period [Nov,
1740 to Feb. 1743] was not generally known; but the secret transpired
several years afterwards, and was avowed by himself on the following
occasion:—Mr. Wedderburne (now Lord Loughborough), Dr. Johnson, Dr.
Francis (the translator of <i>Horace</i>), the present writer, and others
dined with the late Mr. Foote. An important debate towards the end of
Sir Robert Walpole's administration being mentioned, Dr. Francis
observed, "that Mr. Pitt's speech on that occasion was the best he had
ever read." He added, "that he had employed eight years of his life in
the study of Demosthenes, and finished a translation of that celebrated
orator, with all the decorations of style and language within the reach
of his capacity; but he had met with nothing equal to the speech above
mentioned." Many of the company remembered the debate; and some passages
were cited with the approbation and applause of all present. During the
ardour of conversation, Johnson remained silent. As soon as the warmth
of praise subsided, he opened with these words:—"That speech I wrote in
a garret in Exeter Street." The company was struck with astonishment.
After staring at each other in silent amaze, Dr. Francis asked how that
speech could be written by him? "Sir," said Johnson, "I wrote it in
Exeter Street. I never had been in the gallery of the House of Commons
but once. Cave had interest with the door-keepers. He, and the persons
employed under him, gained admittance: they brought away the subject of
discussion, the names of the speakers, the side they took, and the order
in which they rose, together with notes of the arguments advanced in the
course of the debate. The whole was afterwards communicated to me, and I
composed the speeches in the form which they now have in the
Parliamentary Debates." To this discovery Dr. Francis made
answer:—"Then, sir, you have exceeded Demosthenes himself, for to say
that you have exceeded Francis's <i>Demosthenes</i>, would be saying
nothing." The rest of the company bestowed lavish encomiums on Johnson:
one, in particular, praised his impartiality; observing, that he dealt
out reason and eloquence with an equal hand to both parties. "That is
not quite true," said Johnson; "I saved appearances tolerably well, but
I took care that the WHIG DOGS should not have the best of it."'
Murphy's <i>Life of Johnson</i>, p. 343.</p>

<p>Murphy, we must not forget, wrote from memory, for there is no reason to
think that he kept notes. That his memory cannot altogether be trusted
has been shown by Boswell (<i>ante</i>, p. 391, note 4). This dinner with
Foote must have taken place at least nineteen years before this account
was published, for so many years had Dr. Francis been dead. At the time
when Johnson was living in Exeter-street he was not engaged on the
magazine. Nevertheless the main facts may be true enough. Johnson
himself told Boswell (<i>post</i>, May 13, 1778) that in Lord Chesterfield's
<i>Miscellaneous Works</i> (ii. 319) there were two speeches ascribed to
Chesterfield which he had himself entirely written. Horace Walpole
(<i>Letters</i>, i. 147) complained that the published report of his own
first speech 'did not contain one sentence of the true one.' Johnson, in
his preface to the <i>Literary Magazine</i> of 1756, seems to confess what he
had done, unless, indeed, he was altogether making himself the mere
mouth-piece of the publisher. He says:—'We shall not attempt to give
any regular series of debates, or to amuse our readers with senatorial
rhetorick. The speeches inserted in other papers have been long known to
be fictitious, and produced sometimes by men who never heard the debate,
nor had any authentick information. We have no design to impose thus
grossly on our readers.' (<i>Works</i>, v. 363.)</p>

<p>The secret that Johnson wrote these <i>Debates</i> was indeed well kept. He
seems to be aimed at in a question that was put to Cave in his
examination before the House of Lords in 1747. 'Being asked "if he ever
had any person whom he kept in pay to make speeches for him," he said,
"he never had."' (<i>Parl. Hist</i>. xiv. 60.) Herein he lied in order, no
doubt, to screen Johnson. Forty-four years later Horace Walpole wrote
(<i>Letters</i>, ix. 319), 'I never knew Johnson wrote the speeches in the
<i>Gentleman's Magazine</i> till he died.' Johnson told Boswell 'that as soon
as he found that they were thought genuine he determined that he would
write no more of them, "for he would not be accessory to the propagation
of falsehood."' (<i>Ante</i>, p. 152.) One of his <i>Debates</i> was translated
into French, German, and Spanish (<i>Gent. Mag</i>. xiii. 59), and, no doubt,
was accepted abroad as authentic. When he learnt this his conscience
might well have received a shock. That it did receive a shock seems
almost capable of proof. It was in the number of the <i>Magazine</i> for
February, 1743—at the beginning of March, that is to say—that the fact
of these foreign translations was made known. The last Debate that
Johnson wrote was for the 22nd day of February in that year. In 1740,
1741, and 1742, he had worked steadily at his <i>Debates</i>. The beginning
of 1743 found him no less busy. His task suddenly came to an end. Among
foreign nations his speeches were read as the very words of English
statesmen. To the propagation of such a falsehood as this he would no
longer be accessory. Fifteen years later Smollett quoted them as if they
were genuine (<i>History of England</i>, iii. 73). Here, however, Johnson's
conscience was void of offence; for 'he had cautioned him not to rely on
them, for that they were not authentic.' (Hawkins, <i>Life</i>, p. 129.)</p>

<p>That they should generally have passed current shews how unacquainted
people at that time were with real debating. Even if we had not
Johnson's own statement, both from external and internal evidence we
could have known that they were for the most part 'the mere coinage of
his imagination.' They do not read like speeches that had ever been
spoken. 'None of them,' Mr. Flood said, 'were at all like real debates'
(<i>post</i>, under March 30, 1771). They are commonly formed of general
statements which suit any one speaker just as well as any other. The
scantier were the notes that were given him by those who had heard the
debate, the more he had to draw on his imagination. But his was an
imagination which supplied him with what was general much more readily
than with what was particular. Had De Foe been the composer he would
have scattered over each speech the most ingenious and probable matters
of detail, but De Foe and Johnson were wide as the poles asunder.
Neither had Johnson any dramatic power. His parliamentary speakers have
scarcely more variety than the characters in <i>Irene</i>. Unless he had been
a constant frequenter of the galleries of the two Houses, he could not
have acquired any knowledge of the style and the peculiarities of the
different members. Nay, even of their modes of thinking and their
sentiments he could have gained but the most general notions. Of
debating he knew nothing. It was the set speeches in <i>Livy</i> and the old
historians that he took as his models. In his orations there is very
little of 'the tart reply;' there is, indeed, scarcely any examination
of an adversary's arguments. So general are the speeches that the order
in which they are given might very often without inconvenience be
changed. They are like a series of leading articles on both sides of the
question, but all written by one man. Johnson is constantly shifting his
character, and, like Falstaff and the Prince, playing first his own part
and then his opponent's. It is wonderful how well he preserves his
impartiality, though he does 'take care that the Whig dogs should not
have the best of it.'</p>

<p>He not only took the greatest liberties in his reports, but he often
took them openly. Thus an army bill was debated in committee on Dec. 10,
1740, and again the following day on the report in the full House. 'As
in these two debates,' he writes, 'the arguments were the same, Mr.
Gulliver has thrown them into one to prevent unnecessary repetitions.'
(<i>Gent. Mag</i>. Dec. 1742, p. 676.) In each House during the winter of
1742-3 there was a debate on taking the Hanoverian troops into pay. The
debate in the Lords was spread over five numbers of the <i>Magazine</i> in
the following summer and autumn. It was not till the spring of 1744 that
the turn of the Commons came, and then they were treated somewhat
scurvily. 'This debate,' says the reporter, who was Johnson, 'we thought
it necessary to contract by the omission of those arguments which were
fully discussed in the House of Hurgoes, and of those speakers who
produced them, lest we should disgust our readers by tedious
repetitions.' (<i>Ib</i>. xiv. 125.) Many of these debates have been reported
somewhat briefly by Bishop (afterwards Archbishop) Seeker. To follow his
account requires an accurate knowledge of the times, whereas Johnson's
rhetorick for the most part is easily understood even by one very
ignorant of the history of the first two Georges. Much of it might have
been spoken on almost any occasion, for or against almost any minister.
It is true that we here and there find such a correspondence between the
two reports as shews that Johnson, as he has himself told us, was at
times furnished with some information. But, on the other hand, we can no
less clearly see that he was often drawing solely on his imagination.
Frequently there is but the slightest agreement between the reports
given by the two men of the same speeches. Of this a good instance is
afforded by Lord Carteret's speech of Feb. 13, 1741. According to
Johnson 'the Hurgo Quadrert began in this manner':—</p>

<p>'As the motion which I am about to make is of the highest importance and
of the most extensive consequences; as it cannot but meet with all the
opposition which the prejudices of some and the interest of others can
raise against it; as it must have the whole force of ministerial
influence to encounter without any assistance but from justice and
reason, I hope to be excused by your Lordships for spending some time in
endeavouring to shew that it wants no other support; that it is not
founded upon doubtful suspicions but upon uncontestable facts,' and so
on for eight more lines. (<i>Gent. Mag</i>. xi. 339).</p>

<p>The Bishop's note begins as follows:—</p>

<p>'CARTERET. I am glad to see the House so full. The honour of the nation
is at stake. And the oldest man hath not known such circumstances as we
are in. When storms rise you must see what pilots you have, and take
methods to make the nation easy. I shall (1) go through the foreign
transactions of several years; (2) The domestic; (3) Prove that what I
am about to propose is a parliamentary method.' (<i>Parl. Hist</i>. xi.
1047.)</p>

<p>Still more striking is the difference in the two reports of a speech by
Lord Talbot on May 25, 1742. According to the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xii. 519,
'the Hurgo Toblat spoke to this effect':—</p>

<p>'So high is my veneration for this great assembly that it is never
without the utmost efforts of resolution that I can prevail upon myself
to give my sentiments upon any question that is the subject of debate,
however strong may be my conviction, or however ardent my zeal.'</p>

<p>The Bishop makes him say:—</p>

<p>'I rise up only to give time to others to consider how they will carry
on the debate.' (<i>Parl. Hist</i>. xii. 646.)</p>

<p>On Feb. 13, 1741, the same Lord, being called to order for saying that
there were Lords who were influenced by a place, exclaimed, according to
the Bishop, '"By the eternal G—d, I will defend my cause everywhere."
But Lords calling to order, he recollected himself and made an excuse.'
(<i>Parl. Hist</i>. xi. 1063). In the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xi. 4l9, 'the Hurgo Toblat
resumed:—"My Lords, whether anything has escaped from me that deserves
such severe animadversions your Lordships must decide."'</p>

<p>Once at least in Johnson's reports a speech is given to the wrong
member. In the debate on the Gin Bill on Feb. 22, 1743 (<i>Gent. Mag</i>.
xiii. 696), though the Bishop's notes show that he did not speak, yet a
long speech is put into his mouth. It was the Earl of Sandwich who had
spoken at this turn of the debate. The editor of the <i>Parl. Hist</i>. (xii.
1398), without even notifying the change, coolly transfers the speech
from the 'decent' Seeker[1466], who was afterwards Primate, to the
grossly licentious Earl. A transference such as this is, however, but of
little moment. For the most part the speeches would be scarcely less
lifelike, if all on one side were assigned to some nameless Whig, and all
on the other side to some nameless Tory. It is nevertheless true that
here and there are to be found passages which no doubt really fell from
the speaker in whose mouth they are put. They mention some fact or
contain some allusion which could not otherwise have been known by
Johnson. Even if we had not Cave's word for it, we might have inferred
that now and then a member was himself his own reporter. Thus in the
<i>Gent. Mag</i>. for February 1744 (p. 68) we find a speech by Sir John St.
Aubyn that had appeared eight months earlier in the very same words in
the <i>London Magazine</i>. That Johnson copied a rival publication is most
unlikely—impossible, I might say. St. Aubyn, I conjecture, sent a copy
of his speech to both editors. In the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for April 1743 (p.
184), a speech by Lord Percival on Dec. 10, 1742, is reported apparently
at full length. The debate itself was not published till the spring of
1744, when the reader is referred for this speech to the back number in
which it had already been inserted. (<i>Ib</i>. xiv. 123).</p>

<p>The <i>London Magazine</i> generally gave the earlier report; it was,
however, twitted by its rival with its inaccuracy. In one debate, it was
said, 'it had introduced instead of twenty speakers but six, and those
in a very confused manner. It had attributed to Caecilius words
remembered by the whole audience to be spoken by M. Agrippa.' (<i>Gent.
Mag</i>. xii. 512). The report of the debate of Feb. 13, 1741, in the
<i>London Magazine</i> fills more than twenty-two columns of the <i>Parl.
Hist</i>. (xi. 1130) with a speech by Lord Bathurst. That he did speak is
shewn by Secker (<i>ib</i>. p. 1062). No mention of him is made, however, in
the report in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. (xi. 339). But, on the other hand, it
reports eleven speakers, while the <i>London Magazine</i> gives but five.
Secker shows that there were nineteen. Though the <i>London Magazine</i> was
generally earlier in publishing the debates, it does not therefore
follow that Johnson had seen their reports when he wrote his. His may
have been kept back by Cave's timidity for some months even after they
had been set up in type. In the staleness of the debate there was some
safeguard against a parliamentary prosecution.</p>

<p>Mr. Croker maintains (Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 44) that Johnson wrote the
<i>Debates</i> from the time (June 1738) that they assumed the <i>Lilliputian</i>
title till 1744. In this he is certainly wrong. Even if we had not
Johnson's own statement, from the style of the earlier <i>Debates</i> we
could have seen that they were not written by him. No doubt we come
across numerous traces of his work; but this we should have expected.
Boswell tells us that Guthrie's reports were sent to Johnson for
revision (<i>ante</i>, p. 118). Nay, even a whole speech now and then may be
from his hand. It is very likely that he wrote, for instance, the
<i>Debate</i> on buttons and button-holes (<i>Gent. Mag</i>. viii. 627), and the
<i>Debate</i> on the registration of seamen (<i>ib</i>. xi.). But it is absurd to
attribute to him passages such as the following, which in certain
numbers are plentiful enough long after June 1738. 'There never was any
measure pursued more consistent with, and more consequential of, the
sense of this House' (<i>ib</i>. ix. 340). 'It gave us a handle of making
such reprisals upon the Iberians as this Crown found the sweets of'
(<i>ib</i>. x. 281). 'That was the only expression that the least shadow of
fault was found with' (ib. xi. 292).</p>

<p>'Johnson told me himself,' says Boswell (<i>ante</i>, p. 150), 'that he was
the sole composer of the <i>Debates</i> for those three years only
(1741-2-3). He was not, however, precisely exact in his statement, which
he mentioned from hasty recollection; for it is sufficiently evident
that his composition of them began November 19, 1740, and ended February
23 [22], 1742-3.' Some difficulty is caused in following Boswell's
statement by the length of time that often elapsed between the debate
itself and its publication. The speeches that were spoken between Nov.
19, or, more strictly speaking, Nov. 25, 1740, and Feb. 22, 1743, were
in their publication spread through the <i>Magazine</i> from July 1741 to
March, 1744. On Feb. 13, 1741, Lord Carteret in the House of 'Lords, and
Mr. Sandys, 'the Motion-maker[1467],' in the House of Commons, moved an
address to the King for the removal of Sir Robert Walpole. Johnson's
report of the debate in the Lords was published in the <i>Magazine</i> for
the next July and August. The year went round. Walpole's ministry was
overthrown, and Walpole himself was banished to the House of Lords. A
second year went by. At length, in three of the spring numbers of 1743,
the debate on Sandys's motion was reported. It had been published in the
<i>London Magazine</i> eleven months earlier.</p>

<p>Cave, if he was tardy, nevertheless was careful that his columns should
not want variety. Thus in the number for July 1743, we have the middle
part of the debate in the Lords on Feb. 1, 1743, the end of the debate
in the Commons on March 9, 1742, and the beginning of another in the
Commons on the following March 23. From the number for July 1741 to the
number for March 1744 Johnson, as I have already said, was the sole
composer of the <i>Debates</i>. The irregularity with which they were given
at first sight seems strange; but in it a certain method can be
discovered. The proceedings of a House of Commons that had come to an
end might, as I have shown, be freely published. There had been a
dissolution after the session which closed in April 1741. The
publication of the <i>Debates</i> of the old parliament could at once begin,
and could go on freely from month to month all the year round. But they
would not last for ever. In 1742, in the autumn recess, the time when
experience had shewn that the resolution of the House could be broken
with the least danger, the <i>Debates</i> of the new parliament were
published. They were continued even in the short session before
Christmas. But the spring of 1743 saw a cautious return to the reports
of the old parliament. The session closed on April 21, and in the May
number the comparatively fresh <i>Debates</i> began again. In one case the
report was not six months after date. In the beginning of 1744 this
publication went on even in the session, but it was confined to the
proceedings of the previous winter.</p>

<p>The following table shews the order in which Johnson's Debates were
published:—</p>

<p>_Gentleman's                               <i>Debate or part
Magazine</i>.                                  of debate of_</p>

<p>July, 1741     {Parliament was dissolved } Feb. 13, 1741
               { on April 25, 1741.      }
Aug.   "                                   Feb. 13,  "</p>

<p>Sept.  "                                  {Jan. 27,  "<br/>

                                          {Mar.  2,  "<br/>

Oct.   "                                   Mar.  2,  "<br/>
</p>

<p>Nov.   "                                   Mar.  2,  "</p>

<p>Dec.   "      { The new Parliament met}    Dec.  9, 1740<br/>

              {       on Dec. 1.      }<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Gentleman's                             Debate or part
Magazine.                                  of debate of</i></p>

<p>Supplement to 1741                         Dec. 2, "<br/>

                                           Dec. 12,"<br/>

Jan. 1742                                  Feb. 3, 1741<br/>

                                           Feb. 27, "<br/>

Feb. "                                     Jan. 26, "<br/>

                                           April 13, "<br/>

Mar. "                                     Feb. 24, "<br/>

                                           April 13, "<br/>

April "                                    Jan. 27, "<br/>

                                           Feb. 24, "<br/>

May "                                      Nov. 25, 1740<br/>

June "                                     Nov. 25, "<br/>

                                           April 8, 1741<br/>

July "         The session ended on July   April 8, "<br/>

                15.                        Dec. 1, "<br/>

                                           Dec. 4, "<br/>

Aug. "                                     Dec. 4, "<br/>

Sept. "                                    Dec. 4, "<br/>

                                           Dec. 8, "<br/>

Oct. "                                     Dec. 8, "<br/>

                                           May 25, 1742<br/>

Nov. "         The Session opened on       May 25, "<br/>

               Nov. 16.<br/>

Dec. "                                     May 25, "<br/>

                                           June 1, "<br/>

Supplement to 1742                         Dec. 10, 1740<br/>

                                           June 1, 1742<br/>

Jan. 1743                                  Dec. 10, 1740<br/>

Feb. "                                     Feb. 13, 1741<br/>

Mar. "                                     Feb. 13, "<br/>

April "     The Session ended on April 21  Feb. 13, "<br/>

May "                                      Mar. 9, 1742<br/>

                                           Nov. 16, "<br/>

June "                                     Mar. 9, "<br/>

                                           Feb. 1, 1743<br/>

July "                                     Mar. 9, 1742<br/>

                                           Mar. 23, "<br/>

                                           Feb. 1, 1743<br/>

Aug. "                                     Feb. 1, "<br/>

Sept. "                                    Feb. 1, "<br/>

Oct. "                                     Feb. 1, "<br/>

Nov. "                                     Feb. 22, "<br/>

Dec. "     The Session opened on Dec. 1    Feb. 22, "<br/>

Supplement to 1743                         Feb. 22, "<br/>

Jan. 1744                                  Feb. 22, "<br/>

Feb. "                                     Dec. 10, 1742<br/>

                                           Feb. 22, 1743<br/>

Mar. "                                     Dec. 10, 1742<br/>
</p>

<p>During the rest of 1744 the debates were given in the old form, and in a
style that is a close imitation of Johnson's. Most likely they were
composed by Hawkesworth (<i>ante</i>, p. 252). In 1745 they were fewer in
number, and in 1746 the reports of the Senate of Lilliputia with its
Hurgoes and Clinabs passed away for ever. They had begun, to quote the
words of the Preface to the <i>Magazine</i> for 1747, at a time when 'a
determined spirit of opposition in the national assemblies communicated
itself to almost every individual, multiplied and invigorated periodical
papers, and rendered politics the chief, if not the only object, of
curiosity.' They are a monument to the greatness of Walpole, and to the
genius of Johnson. Had that statesman not been overthrown, the people
would have called for these reports even though Johnson had refused to
write them. Had Johnson still remained the reporter, even though Walpole
no longer swayed the Senate of the Lilliputians, the speeches of that
tumultuous body would still have been read. For though they are not
debates, yet they have a vast vigour and a great fund of wisdom of their
own.</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<h2>APPENDIX B.</h2>

<p>JOHNSON'S LETTERS TO HIS MOTHER AND MISS PORTER IN 1759. (<i>Page 340</i>.)</p>

<p>Malone published seven of the following letters in the fourth edition,
and Mr. Croker the rest.</p>

<h5>'TO MRS. JOHNSON IN LICHFIELD.</h5>

<h5>'HONOURED MADAM,</h5>

<p>'The account which Miss [Porter] gives me of your health pierces my
heart. God comfort and preserve you and save you, for the sake of Jesus
Christ.</p>

<p>'I would have Miss read to you from time to time the Passion of our
Saviour, and sometimes the sentences in the Communion Service, beginning
"<i>Come unto me, all ye that travail and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest</i>."</p>

<p>'I have just now read a physical book, which inclines me to think that a
strong infusion of the bark would do you good. Do, dear mother, try it.</p>

<p>'Pray, send me your blessing, and forgive all that I have done amiss to
you. And whatever you would have done, and what debts you would have
paid first, or any thing else that you would direct, let Miss put it
down; I shall endeavour to obey you.</p>

<p>'I have got twelve guineas[1468] to send you, but unhappily am at a loss
how to send it to-night. If I cannot send it to-night, it will come by
the next post.</p>

<p>'Pray, do not omit any thing mentioned in this letter: God bless you for
ever and ever.</p>

<p>'I am your dutiful son,</p>

<h5>'SAM. JOHNSON.'</h5>

<p>'Jan. 13, 1758[1469].'</p>

<p>'To Miss PORTER, AT MRS. JOHNSON'S, IN LICHFIELD.</p>

<p>'MY DEAR Miss,</p>

<p>'I think myself obliged to you beyond all expression of gratitude for
your care of my dear mother. God grant it may not be without success.
Tell Kitty[1470] that I shall never forget her tenderness for her
mistress. Whatever you can do, continue to do. My heart is very full.</p>

<p>'I hope you received twelve guineas on Monday. I found a way of sending
them by means of the postmaster, after I had written my letter, and hope
they came safe. I will send you more in a few days. God bless you all.</p>

<p>'I am, my dear,</p>

<p>'Your most obliged</p>

<p>'And most humble servant,</p>

<h5>'SAM. JOHNSON.'</h5>

<p>'Jan. 16, 1759.<br/>

'Over the leaf is a letter to my mother.'<br/>
</p>

<h5>'DEAR HONOURED MOTHER,</h5>

<p>'Your weakness afflicts me beyond what I am willing to communicate to
you. I do not think you unfit to face death, but I know not how to bear
the thought of losing you. Endeavour to do all you [can] for yourself.
Eat as much as you can.</p>

<p>'I pray often for you; do you pray for me. I have nothing to add to my
last letter.</p>

<p>'I am, dear, dear mother</p>

<p>'Your dutiful son,</p>

<h5>'SAM. JOHNSON.'</h5>

<p>'Jan. 16, 1759.'</p>

<p>'To MRS. JOHNSON, IN LICHFIELD.</p>

<h5>'DEAR HONOURED MOTHER,</h5>

<p>'I fear you are too ill for long letters; therefore I will only tell
you, you have from me all the regard that can possibly subsist in the
heart. I pray God to bless you for evermore, for Jesus Christ's sake.
Amen.</p>

<p>'Let Miss write to me every post, however short.</p>

<p>'I am, dear mother,</p>

<p>'Your dutiful son,</p>

<h5>'SAM. JOHNSON.'</h5>

<p>'Jan. 18, 1759.'</p>

<h4>'TO MISS PORTER, AT MRS. JOHNSON'S, IN LICHFIELD.</h4>

<p>'DEAR Miss,</p>

<p>'I will, if it be possible, come down to you. God grant I may yet [find]
my dear mother breathing and sensible. Do not tell her, lest I
disappoint her. If I miss to write next post, I am on the road.</p>

<p>                             'I am, my dearest Miss,<br/>

                                       'Your most humble servant,<br/>

                                                      'SAM. JOHNSON.'<br/>

'Jan. 20, 1759.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>On the other side</i>.</p>

<h5>'DEAR HONOURED MOTHER[1471],</h5>

<p>'Neither your condition nor your character make it fit for me to say
much. You have been the best mother, and I believe the best woman in the
world. I thank you for your indulgence to me, and beg forgiveness of all
that I have done ill, and all that I have omitted to do well. God grant
you his Holy Spirit, and receive you to everlasting happiness, for Jesus
Christ's sake. Amen. Lord Jesus receive your spirit. Amen.</p>

<p>                              'I am, dear, dear mother,<br/>

                                      'Your dutiful son,<br/>

                                              'SAM. JOHNSON.'<br/>

'Jan. 20, 1759.'<br/>
</p>

<h4>'TO MISS PORTER IN LICHFIELD.</h4>

<p>'You will conceive my sorrow for the loss of my mother, of the best
mother. If she were to live again surely I should behave better to her.
But she is happy, and what is past is nothing to her; and for me, since
I cannot repair my faults to her, I hope repentance will efface them. I
return you and all those that have been good to her my sincerest thanks,
and pray God to repay you all with infinite advantage. Write to me, and
comfort me, dear child. I shall be glad likewise, if Kitty will write to
me. I shall send a bill of twenty pounds in a few days, which I thought
to have brought to my mother; but God suffered it not. I have not power
or composure to say much more. God bless you, and bless us all.</p>

<p>                         'I am, dear Miss,<br/>

                                 'Your affectionate humble servant,<br/>

                                                         'SAM. JOHNSON.'<br/>

'Jan. 23, 1759[1472].'<br/>
</p>

<p>'To Miss PORTER.</p>

<p>(<i>The beginning is torn and lost</i>.)</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<p>'You will forgive me if I am not yet so composed as to give any
directions about any thing. But you are wiser and better than I, and I
shall be pleased with all that you shall do. It is not of any use for me
now to come down; nor can I bear the place. If you want any directions,
Mr. Howard[1473] will advise you. The twenty pounds I could not get a
bill for to-night, but will send it on Saturday.</p>

<p>'I am, my dear, your affectionate servant,</p>

<h5>'SAM. JOHNSON.'</h5>

<p>'Jan. 25, 1759.'</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<p>'To Miss PORTER.</p>

<p>'DEAR Miss,</p>

<p>'I have no reason to forbear writing, but that it makes my heart heavy,
and I had nothing particular to say which might not be delayed to the
next post; but had no thoughts of ceasing to correspond with my dear
Lucy, the only person now left in the world with whom I think myself
connected. There needed not my dear mother's desire, for every heart
must lean to somebody, and I have nobody but you; in whom I put all my
little affairs with too much confidence to desire you to keep receipts,
as you prudently proposed.</p>

<p>'If you and Kitty will keep the house, I think I shall like it best.
Kitty may carry on the trade for herself, keeping her own stock apart,
and laying aside any money that she receives for any of the goods which
her good mistress has left behind her. I do not see, if this scheme be
followed, any need of appraising the books. My mother's debts, dear
mother, I suppose I may pay with little difficulty; and the little trade
may go silently forward. I fancy Kitty can do nothing better; and I
shall not want to put her out of a house, where she has lived so long,
and with so much virtue. I am very sorry that she is ill, and earnestly
hope that she will soon recover; let her know that I have the highest
value for her, and would do any thing for her advantage. Let her think
of this proposal. I do not see any likelier method by which she may pass
the remaining part of her life in quietness and competence.</p>

<p>'You must have what part of the house you please, while you are inclined
to stay in it; but I flatter myself with the hope that you and I shall
some time pass our days together. I am very solitary and comfortless,
but will not invite you to come hither till I can have hope of making
you live here so as not to dislike your situation. Pray, my dearest,
write to me as often as you can.</p>

<p>'I am, dear Madam,</p>

<p>'Your affectionate humble servant,</p>

<h5>'SAM. JOHNSON.</h5>

<p>'Feb. 6, 1759'</p>

<p> 'To Miss PORTER.</p>

<h5> 'DEAR MADAM,</h5>

<p> 'I thought your last letter long in coming; and did not require or
expect such an inventory of little things as you have sent me. I could
have taken your word for a matter of much greater value. I am glad that
Kitty is better; let her be paid first, as my dear, dear mother ordered,
and then let me know at once the sum necessary to discharge her other
debts, and I will find it you very soon.</p>

<p>'I beg, my dear, that you would act for me without the least scruple,
for I can repose myself very confidently upon your prudence, and hope we
shall never have reason to love each other less. I shall take it very
kindly if you make it a rule to write to me once at least every week,
for I am now very desolate, and am loth to be universally forgotten.</p>

<p>                            'I am, dear sweet,<br/>

                                  'Your affectionate servant,<br/>

                                                    'SAM. JOHNSON.'<br/>

'March 1, 1759.'<br/>
</p>

<h4>'TO MISS PORTER.</h4>

<h5>'DEAR MADAM,</h5>

<p>'I beg your pardon for having so long omitted to write. One thing or
other has put me off. I have this day moved my things and you are now to
direct to me at Staple Inn, London. I hope, my dear, you are well, and
Kitty mends. I wish her success in her trade. I am going to publish a
little story book [<i>Rasselas</i>], which I will send you when it is out.
Write to me, my dearest girl, for I am always glad to hear from you.</p>

<p>                      'I am, my dear, your humble servant,<br/>

                                             'SAM. JOHNSON.'<br/>

'March 23, 1759.'<br/>
</p>

<h4>'TO MISS PORTER.</h4>

<h5>'DEAR MADAM,</h5>

<p>'I am almost ashamed to tell you that all your letters came safe, and
that I have been always very well, but hindered, I hardly know how, from
writing. I sent, last week, some of my works, one for you, one for your
aunt Hunter, who was with my poor dear mother when she died, one for Mr.
Howard, and one for Kitty.</p>

<p>'I beg you, my dear, to write often to me, and tell me how you like my
little book.</p>

<p>                'I am, dear love, your affectionate humble servant,<br/>

                                             'SAM. JOHNSON.'<br/>

'May 10, 1759.'<br/>
</p>

<h2>JOHNSON AT CAMBRIDGE.</h2>

<p>(Page 487.)</p>

<p>The following is the full extract of Dr. Sharp's letter giving an
account of Johnson's visit to Cambridge in 1765:—</p>

<p>'Camb. Mar. 1, 1765.</p>

<p>'As to Johnson, you will be surprised to hear that I have had him in the
chair in which I am now writing. He has ascended my aërial citadel. He
came down on a Saturday evening, with a Mr. Beauclerk, who has a friend
at Trinity. Caliban, you may be sure, was not roused from his lair
before next day noon, and his breakfast probably kept him till night. I
saw nothing of him, nor was he heard of by any one, till Monday
afternoon, when I was sent for home to two gentlemen unknown. In
conversation I made a strange <i>faux pas</i> about Burnaby Greene's poem, in
which Johnson is drawn at full length[1474]. He drank his large potations
of tea with me, interrupted by many an indignant contradiction, and many
a noble sentiment. He had on a better wig than usual, but, one whose
curls were not, like Sir Cloudesly's[1475], formed for 'eternal buckle.'
[1476] Our conversation was chiefly on books, you may be sure. He was
much pleased with a small <i>Milton</i> of mine, published in the author's
lifetime, and with the Greek epigram on his own effigy, of its being the
picture, not of him, but of a bad painter[1477]. There are many manuscript
stanzas, for aught I know, in Milton's own handwriting, and several
interlined hints and fragments. We were puzzled about one of the
sonnets, which we thought was not to be found in Newton's edition[1478],
and differed from all the printed ones. But Johnson cried, "No, no!"
repeated the whole sonnet instantly, <i>memoriter</i>, and shewed it us in
Newton's book. After which he learnedly harangued on sonnet-writing, and
its different numbers. He tells me he will come hither again quickly,
and is promised "an habitation in Emanuel College[1479]." He went back to
town next morning; but as it began to be known that he was in the
university, several persons got into his company the last evening at
Trinity, where, about twelve, he began to be very great; stripped poor
Mrs. Macaulay to the very skin, then gave her for his toast, and drank
her in two bumpers.' (<i>Gent. Mag</i>. for 1785, p. 173.)</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<h2>APPENDIX D.</h2>

<h4>JOHNSON'S LETTER TO DR. LELAND.</h4>

<p>(Page 489.)</p>

<h4>'TO THE REV. DR. LELAND.</h4>

<h5>'SIR,</h5>

<p>'Among the names subscribed to the degree which I have had the honour of
receiving from the university of Dublin, I find none of which I have any
personal knowledge but those of Dr. Andrews and yourself.</p>

<p>'Men can be estimated by those who know them not, only as they are
represented by those who know them; and therefore I flatter myself that
I owe much of the pleasure which this distinction gives me to your
concurrence with Dr. Andrews in recommending me to the learned society.</p>

<p>'Having desired the Provost to return my general thanks to the
University, I beg that you, sir, will accept my particular and immediate
acknowledgements.</p>

<p>'I am, Sir,</p>

<p>'Your most obedient and most humble servant,</p>

<h5>'SAM. JOHNSON.'</h5>

<p>'Johnson's-court, Fleet-street,</p>

<p>London, Oct. 17, 1765.'</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<h2>APPENDIX E.</h2>

<h4>JOHNSON'S 'ENGAGING IN POLITICKS WITH H——N.</h4>

<p>(Page 490.)</p>

<p>In a little volume entitled <i>Parliamentary Logick</i>, by the Right Hon.
W.G. Hamilton, published in 1808, twelve years after the author's death,
is included <i>Considerations on Corn</i>, by Dr. Johnson (<i>Works</i>, v. 321).
It was written, says Hamilton's editor, in November 1766. A dearth had
caused riots. 'Those who want the supports of life,' Johnson wrote,
'will seize them wherever they can be found.' (<i>Ib</i>. p. 322.) He
supported in this tract the bounty for exporting corn. If more than a
year after he had engaged in politics with Mr. Hamilton nothing had been
produced but this short tract, the engagement was not of much
importance. But there was, I suspect, much more in it. Indeed, the
editor says (<i>Preface</i>, p. ix.) that 'Johnson had entered into some
engagement with Mr. Hamilton, occasionally to furnish him with his
sentiments on the great political topicks that should be considered in
Parliament.' Mr. Croker draws attention to a passage in Johnson's letter
to Miss Porter of Jan. 14, 1766 (Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 173) in which he
says: 'I cannot well come [to Lichfield] during the session of
parliament.' In the spring of this same year Burke had broken with
Hamilton, in whose service he had been. 'The occasion of our
difference,' he wrote, 'was not any act whatsoever on my part; it was
entirely upon his, by a voluntary but most insolent and intolerable
demand, amounting to no less than a claim of servitude during the whole
course of my life, without leaving to me at any time a power either of
getting forward with honour, or of retiring with tranquillity' (Burke's
<i>Corres</i>. i. 77). It seems to me highly probable that Hamilton, in
consequence of his having just lost, as I have shewn, Burke's services,
sought Johnson's aid. He had taken Burke 'as a companion in his
studies.' (<i>Ib</i>. p. 48.) 'Six of the best years of my life,' wrote
Burke, 'he took me from every pursuit of literary reputation or of
improvement of my fortune. In that time he made his own fortune (a very
great one).' (<i>Ib</i>. p. 67.) Burke had been recommended to Hamilton by
Dr. Warton. On losing him Hamilton, on Feb. 12, 1765, wrote to Warton,
giving a false account of his separation with Burke, and asking him to
recommend some one to fill his place—some one 'who, in addition to a
taste and an understanding of ancient authors, and what generally passes
under the name of scholarship, has likewise a share of modern knowledge,
and has applied himself in some degree to the study of the law.' By way
of payment he offers at once 'an income, which would neither be
insufficient for him as a man of letters, or disreputable to him as a
gentleman,' and hereafter 'a situation'—a post, that is to say, under
government. (Wooll's <i>Warton</i>, i. 299.) Warton recommended Chambers.
Chambers does not seem to have accepted the post, for we find him
staying on at Oxford (<i>post</i>, ii. 25, 46). Johnson had all the knowledge
that Hamilton required, except that of law. It is this very study that
we find him at this very time entering upon. All this shows that for
some time and to some extent an engagement was formed between him and
Hamilton. Boswell, writing to Malone on Feb. 25, 1791, while <i>The Life
of Johnson</i> was going through the press, says:—</p>

<p>'I shall have more cancels. That <i>nervous</i> mortal W. G. H. is not
satisfied with my report of some particulars <i>which I wrote down from
his own mouth</i>, and is so much agitated that Courtenay has persuaded me
to allow a <i>new edition</i> of them by H. himself to be made at H.'s
expense.'</p>

<p>(Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 829). This would seem to show that there was
something that Hamilton wished to conceal. Horace Walpole (<i>Memoirs of
the Reign of George III</i>, iii. 402) does not give him a character for
truthfulness. He writes on one occasion:—'Hamilton denied it, but his
truth was not renowned.' Miss Burney, who met Hamilton fourteen years
after this, thus describes him:—'This Mr. Hamilton is extremely tall
and handsome; has an air of haughty and fashionable superiority; is
intelligent, dry, sarcastic, and clever. I should have received much
pleasure from his conversational powers, had I not previously been
prejudiced against him, by hearing that he is infinitely artful, double,
and crafty.' (Mme. D'Arblay's <i>Diary</i>, i. 293).</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<h2>APPENDIX F.</h2>

<h5>JOHNSON'S FIRST ACQUAINTANCE WITH THE THRALES AND HIS SERIOUS ILLNESS.</h5>

<p>(<i>Page</i> 490.)</p>

<p>Johnson (<i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 191) writes:—'My first knowledge of Thrale
was in 1765.' In a letter to Mrs. Thrale, he says:—'You were but
five-and-twenty when I knew you first.' (<i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 284). As
she was born on Jan. 16/27, 1741, this would place their introduction in
1766. In another letter, written on July 8, 1784, he talks of her
'kindness which soothed twenty years of a life radically wretched.'
(<i>Ib</i>. ii. 376). Perhaps, however, he here spoke in round numbers. Mrs.
Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 125) says they first met in 1764. Mr. Thrale, she
writes, sought an excuse for inviting him. 'The celebrity of Mr.
Woodhouse (<i>post</i>, ii. 127), a shoemaker, whose verses were at that time
the subject of common discourse, soon afforded a 'pretence.' There is a
notice of Woodhouse in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for June, 1764 (p. 289).
Johnson, she says, dined with them every Thursday through the winter of
1764-5, and in the autumn of 1765 followed them to Brighton. In the
<i>Piozzi Letters</i> (i. 1) there is a letter of his, dated Aug. 13, 1765,
in which he speaks of his intention to join them there.</p>

<p>'From that time,' she writes, 'his visits grew more frequent till, in
the year 1766, his health, which he had always complained of, grew so
exceedingly bad, that he could not stir out of his room in the court he
inhabited for many <i>weeks</i> together, I think <i>months</i>. Mr. Thrale's
attentions and my own now became so acceptable to him, that he often
lamented to us the horrible condition of his mind, which, he said, was
nearly distracted: and though he charged <i>us</i> to make him odd solemn
promises of secrecy on so strange a subject, yet when we waited on him
one morning, and heard him, in the most pathetic terms, beg the prayers
of Dr. Delap [the Rector of Lewes] who had left him as we came in, I
felt excessively affected with grief, and well remember my husband
involuntarily lifted up one hand to shut his mouth, from provocation at
hearing a man so widely proclaim what he could at last persuade no one
to believe; and what, if true, would have been so unfit to reveal. Mr.
Thrale went away soon after, leaving me with him, and bidding me prevail
on him to quit his close habitation in the court, and come with us to
Streatham, where I undertook the care of his health, and had the honour
and happiness of contributing to its restoration.'</p>

<p>It is not possible to reconcile the contradiction in dates between
Johnson and Mrs. Piozzi, nor is it easy to fix the time of this illness.
That before February, 1766, he had had an illness so serious as to lead
him altogether to abstain from wine is beyond a doubt. Boswell, on his
return to England in that month, heard it from his own lips (<i>post</i>, ii.
8). That this illness must have attacked him after March 1, 1765, when
he visited Cambridge, is also clear; for at that time he was still
drinking wine (<i>ante</i>, Appendix C). That he was unusually depressed in
the spring of this year is shewn by his entry at Easter (<i>ante</i>, p.
487). From his visit to Dr. Percy in the summer of 1764 (<i>ante</i>, p. 486)
to the autumn of 1765, we have very little information about him. For
more than two years he did not write to Boswell (<i>post</i>, ii. 1). Dr.
Adams (<i>ante</i>, p. 483) describes the same kind of attack as Mrs. Piozzi.
Its date is not given. Boswell, after quoting an entry made on Johnson's
birthday, Sept. 18, 1764, says 'about this time he was afflicted' with
the illness Dr. Adams describes. From Mrs. Piozzi, from Johnson's
account to Boswell, and from Dr. Adams we learn of a serious illness.
Was there more than one? If there was only one, then Boswell is wrong in
placing it before March 1, 1765, when Johnson was still a wine-drinker,
and Mrs. Piozzi is wrong in placing it after February, 1766, when he had
become an abstainer. Johnson certainly stayed at Streatham from before
Midsummer to October in 1766 (<i>post</i>, ii. 25, and <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 71),
and this fact lends support to Mrs. Piozzi's statement. But, on the
other hand, his meetings with Boswell in February of that year, and his
letters to Langton of March 9 and May 10 (<i>post</i>, ii. 16, 17), shew a
not unhappy frame of mind. Boswell, in his <i>Hebrides</i> (Oct. 16, 1773),
speaks of Johnson's illness in 1766. If it was in 1766 that he was ill,
it must have been after May 10 and before Midsummer-day, and this period
is almost too brief for Mrs. Piozzi's account. It is a curious
coincidence that Cowper was introduced to the Unwins in the same year in
which Johnson, according to his own account, had his first knowledge of
the Thrales. (Southey's <i>Cowper</i>, i, 171.)</p>
</body>
</html>