<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix XXI: Notes on Boswell’s note</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="appendix-21" epub:type="appendix">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Appendix</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Notes on Boswell’s note</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p>(Notes on Boswell’s note on pages 421⁠–⁠422.)</p>
				<p id="IV-page-443a">[H-1] The last lines of the inscription on this urn are borrowed, with a slight change, from the last paragraph of the last <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Rambler</i>. (Johnson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Works</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> 465, and see <a href="part-1.xhtml#I-page-226">here</a>.) Johnson visited Colonel Myddelton on August 29, 1774, in his Tour to Wales. See <a href="Hebrides#V-page-453">here</a>.</i></p>
				<p>[H-2] Johnson, writing to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor on <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 3, 1783, said:⁠—“I sat to Opey (sic) as long as he desired, and I think the head is finished, but <a id="IV-page-444" />it is not much admired.” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 481. Hawkins (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Johnson</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 569) says that in 1784 “Johnson resumed sitting to Opie, but,” he adds, “I believe the picture was never finished.”</p>
				<p>[H-3] Of this picture, which was the one painted for Beauclerk (see <a href="part-4.xhtml#IV-page-180">here</a>), it is stated in Johnson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Work</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1787, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> 204, that “there is in it that appearance of a labouring working mind, of an indolent reposing body, which he had to a very great degree.”</p>
				<p>[H-4] It seems almost certain that the portrait of Johnson in the Common Room of University College, Oxford, is this very mezzotinto. It was given to the College by Sir William Scott, and it is a mezzotinto from Opie’s portrait. It has been reproduced for this work, and will be found facing page 244 of volume <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> Scott’s inscription on the back of the frame is given on page 245, note 3, of the same volume.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
