<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix XIX: Notes on Johnson’s Will, etc.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="appendix-19" epub:type="appendix">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Appendix</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Notes on Johnson’s Will, <abbr>etc.</abbr></h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p>(Notes on Boswell’s note on pages 403⁠–⁠405.)</p>
				<p id="IV-page-440">[F-1] In a letter quoted in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Croker’s Boswell, <abbr>p.</abbr> 427, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson calls Thomas Johnson “cousin,” and says that in the last sixteen months he had given him £40. He mentions his death in 1779. Piozzi <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Letters</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 45.</p>
				<p>[F-2] Hawkins (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 603) says that Elizabeth Herne was Johnson’s first-cousin, and that he had constantly⁠—how long he does not say⁠—contributed £15 towards her maintenance.</p>
				<p>[F-3] For Mauritius Lowe, see <i>ante</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 324, and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 201.</p>
				<p>[F-4] To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Windham, two days earlier, he had given a copy of the New Testament, saying:⁠—“Extremum hoc munus morientis habeto.” Windham’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 28.</p>
				<p>[F-5] For <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gardiner see <i>ante</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 242.</p>
				<p>[F-6] <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Desmoulins was the son of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Desmoulins (<i>ante</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 222, 368), and the grandson of Johnson’s godfather, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Swinfen (<i>ante</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 34). Johnson mentions him in a letter to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale in 1778. “Young Desmoulins is taken in an <em>under-something</em> of Drury Lane; he knows not, I believe, his own denomination.” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Piozzi Letters</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 25.</p>
				<p>[F-7] The reference is to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Rambler</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 41 (not 42 as Boswell says), where Johnson mentions “those vexations and anxieties with which all human enjoyments are polluted.”</p>
				<p>[F-8] Bishop Sanderson described his soul as “infinitely polluted with sin.” Walton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1838, <abbr>p.</abbr> 396.</p>
				<p>[F-9] Hume, writing in 1742 about his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essays Moral and Political</i>, says:⁠—</p>
				<p>“Innys, the great bookseller in Paul’s Churchyard, wonders there is not a new edition, for that he cannot find copies for his customers.” J.H. Burton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hume</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 143.</p>
				<p>[F-10] Nichols (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Lit.</abbr> <abbr>Anec.</abbr></i> ii. 554) says that, on <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 7,</p>
				<p>“Johnson asked him whether any of the family of Faden the printer were living. Being told that the geographer near Charing Cross was Faden’s son, he said, after a short pause:⁠—‘I borrowed a guinea of his father near thirty years ago; be so good as to take this, and pay it for me.’ ”</p>
				<p id="IV-page-441">[F-11] Nowhere does Hawkins more show the malignancy of his character than in his attacks on Johnson’s black servant, and through him on Johnson. With the passage in which this offensive caveat is found he brings his work to a close. At the first mention of Frank (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 328) he says:⁠—</p>
				<p>“His first master had <em>in great humanity</em> made him a Christian, and his last for no assignable reason, nay rather in despite of nature, and to unfit him for being useful according to his capacity, determined to make him a scholar.”</p>
				<p>But Hawkins was a brutal fellow. See <i>ante</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 27, note 2, and 28, note</p>
				<p>1.</p>
				<p>[F-12] Johnson had written to Taylor on <abbr>Oct.</abbr> 23 of this year:⁠—</p>
				<p>“ ‘Coming down from a very restless night I found your letter, which made me a little angry. You tell me that recovery is in my power. This indeed I should be glad to hear if I could once believe it. But you mean to charge me with neglecting or opposing my own health. Tell me, therefore, what I do that hurts me, and what I neglect that would help me.’ This letter is endorsed by Taylor: ‘This is the last letter. My answer, which were (sic) the words of advice he gave to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale the day he dyed, he resented extremely from me.’ ” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Alfred Morrison’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collection of Autographs</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 343.</p>
				<p>“The words of advice” which were given to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale <em>the day before</em> the fatal fit seized him, were that he should abstain from full meals.  <i>ante</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 84, note 4. Johnson’s resentment of Taylor’s advice may account for the absence of his name in his will.</p>
				<p>[F-13] They were sold in 650 Lots, in a four days’ sale. Besides the books there were 146 portraits, of which 61 were framed and glazed. These prints in their frames were sold in lots of 4, 8, and even 10 together, though certainly some of them⁠—and perhaps many⁠—were engravings from Reynolds. The Catalogue of the sale is in the Bodleian Library.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
