<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix XII: The Inmates of Johnson’s House</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="appendix-12" epub:type="appendix">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Appendix</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Inmates of Johnson’s House</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p>(Page 368.)</p>
				<p id="III-page-461">In September of this year (1778) Miss Burney records the following conversation at Streatham:⁠—“MRS. THRALE. ‘Pray, Sir, how does <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams like all this tribe?’ DR. J. ‘Madam, she does not like them at all; but their fondness for her is not greater. She and Desmoulins quarrel incessantly; but as they can both be occasionally of service to each other, and as neither of them have any other place to go to, their animosity does not force them to separate.’⁠ ⁠… MR. T. ‘And pray who is clerk of your kitchen, Sir?’ DR. J. ‘Why, Sir, I am afraid there is none; a general anarchy prevails in my kitchen, as I am told by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Levett, who says it is not now what it used to be.’ MRS. T. ‘<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Levett, I suppose, Sir, has the office of keeping the hospital in health, for he is an apothecary.’ DR. J. ‘Levett, Madam, is a brutal fellow, but I have a good regard for him; for his brutality is in his manners, not his mind.’ MR. T. ‘But how do you get your dinners dressed?’ DR. J. ‘Why, Desmoulins has the chief management of the kitchen; but our roasting is not magnificent, for we have no jack.’ MR. T. ‘No jack! Why, how do they manage without?’ DR. J. ‘Small joints, I believe, they manage with a string, and larger are done at the tavern. I have some thoughts (with a profound gravity) of buying a jack, because I think a jack is some credit to a house.’ MR. T. ‘Well, but you’ll have a spit too.’ DR. J. ‘No, Sir, no; that would be superfluous; for we shall never use it; and if a jack is seen, a spit will be presumed.’ MRS. T. ‘But pray, Sir, who is the Poll you talk of? She that you used to abet in her quarrels with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams, and call out, <q>At her again, Poll! Never flinch, Poll!</q>’ DR. J. ‘Why, I took to Poll very well at first, but she won’t do upon a nearer examination.’ MRS. T. ‘How came she among you, Sir?’ DR. J. ‘Why, I don’t rightly remember, but we could spare her very well from us. Poll is a stupid slut. I had some hopes of her at first; but when I talked to her tightly and closely, I could make nothing of her; she was wiggle waggle, and I could never persuade her to be categorical.’ ” <abbr>Mme.</abbr> D’Arblay’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 114.</p>
				<p>More than a year later Johnson wrote to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale:⁠—“Discord keeps her residence in this habitation, but she has for some time been silent. We have much malice, but no mischief. Levett is rather a friend to Williams, because he hates Desmoulins more. A thing that <a id="III-page-462" />he should hate more than Desmoulins is not to be found.” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Piozzi Letters</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 80. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Piozzi (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Anec.</abbr></i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 213) says:⁠—“He really was oftentimes afraid of going home, because he was so sure to be met at the door with numberless complaints; and he used to lament pathetically to me that they made his life miserable from the impossibility he found of making theirs happy, when every favour he bestowed on one was wormwood to the rest. If, however, I ventured to blame their ingratitude, and condemn their conduct, he would instantly set about softening the one and justifying the other; and finished commonly by telling me, that I knew not how to make allowances for situations I never experienced.” Hawkins (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 404) says:⁠—“Almost throughout Johnson’s life poverty and distressed circumstances seemed to be the strongest of all recommendations to his favour. When asked by one of his most intimate friends, how he could bear to be surrounded by such necessitous and undeserving people as he had about him, his answer was, ‘If I did not assist them, no one else would, and they must be lost for want.’ ” “His humanity and generosity, in proportion to his slender income, were,” writes Murphy (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 146), “unbounded. It has been truly said that the lame, the blind, and the sorrowful found in his house a sure retreat.” See also <i>ante</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 222. At the same time it must be remembered that while <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Desmoulins and Miss Carmichael only brought trouble into the house, in the society of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams and Levett he had real pleasure. See <i>ante</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 232, note 1, and 243, note 3.</p>
				<p>* * * * *</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
