<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix XIV: Altercation Between Dr. Johnson and Dean Barnard</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="appendix-14" epub:type="appendix">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Appendix</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Altercation Between <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson and Dean Barnard</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p>(<i>Page</i> 115, note 4.)</p>
				<p id="IV-page-431">There are at least three accounts of this altercation and three versions of the lines. Two of these versions nearly agree. The earliest is found in a letter by Richard Burke, senior, dated <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 6, 1773 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Burke Correspondence</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 403); the second in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Annual Register</i> for 1776, <abbr>p.</abbr> 223; and the third in Miss Reynolds’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Recollections</i> (Croker’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boswell</i>, 8vo. <abbr>p.</abbr> 833). R. Burke places the scene in Reynolds’s house. Whether he himself was present is not clear. ‘The dean,’ he says, ‘asserted that after forty-five a man did not improve. “I differ with you, Sir,” answered Johnson; “a man may improve, and you yourself have great room for improvement.” The dean was confounded, and for the instant silent. Recovering, he said, “On recollection I see no cause to alter my opinion, except I was to call it improvement for a man to grow (which I allow he may) positive, rude, and insolent, and save arguments by brutality.” ’ Neither the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annual Register</i> nor Miss Reynolds reports the Dean’s speech. But she says that ‘soon after the ladies withdrew, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson followed them, and sitting down by the lady of the house [that is by herself, if they were at Sir Joshua’s] he said, “I am very sorry for having spoken so rudely to the Dean.” “You very well may, Sir.” “Yes,” he said, “it was highly improper to speak in that style to a minister of the gospel, and I am the more hurt on reflecting with what mild dignity he received it.” ’ If Johnson really spoke of the Dean’s <q>mild dignity</q>, it is clear that Richard Burke’s account is wrong. But it was written just after the scene, and Boswell says there was ‘a pretty smart altercation.’ Miss Reynolds continues:⁠—‘When the Dean came up into the drawing-room, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson immediately rose from his seat, and made him sit on the sofa by him, and with such a beseeching look for pardon and with such fond gestures⁠—literally smoothing down his arms and his knees,’ <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annual Register</i> says that Barnard the next day sent the verses addressed to ‘Sir Joshua Reynolds &amp; <abbr>Co.</abbr>’ On the next page I give Richard Burke’s version of the lines, and show the various readings.</p>
				<table>
					<thead>
						<tr>
							<th>Miss Reynold's Version<!-- header --></th>
							<th>Richard Burke's Version<!-- header --></th>
							<th>
								<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annual Register</i>
							</th>
						</tr>
					</thead>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td> </td>
							<td>
								<p>I lately thought no man alive<br/>
								Could e’er improve past forty-five,<br/>
								And ventured to assert it;<br/>
								The observation was not new,<br/>
								But seem’d to me so just and true,<br/>
								That none could controvert it.</p>
							</td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<p><br/>
								’Tis<br/>
								<br/>
								You who perhaps are still</p>
							</td>
							<td>
								<p>“No, Sir,” says Johnson, “’tis not so;<br/>
								<em>That’s</em> your mistake, and I can show<br/>
								An instance, if you doubt it;<br/>
								<em>You, Sir, who are near</em> forty-eight,</p>
								<p>May <em>much</em> improve, “’tis not too late;</p>
								<p>I wish you’d set about it.”</p>
							</td>
							<td> </td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<p><br/>
								<br/>
								could<br/>
								Genius I knew was<br/>
								what none can</p>
							</td>
							<td>
								<p>Encouraged thus to mend my faults,<br/>
								I turn’d his counsel in my thoughts,<br/>
								Which way I <em>should</em> apply it:<br/>
								<em>Learning and wit seem’d</em> past my reach,<br/>
								For who can learn <em>where none will</em> teach?<br/>
								And wit⁠—I could not buy it.</p>
							</td>
							<td>
								<p><br/>
								<br/>
								<br/>
								<br/>
								when none will</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<p><br/>
								may</p>
							</td>
							<td>
								<p>Then come, my friends, and try your skill,<br/>
								You <em>can improve me</em>, if you will;<br/>
								(My books are at a distance).<br/>
								With you I’ll live and learn; and then<br/>
								Instead of books I shall read men,<br/>
								<em>So</em> lend me your assistance. To</p>
							</td>
							<td>
								<p><br/>
								inform<br/>
								<br/>
								<br/>
								<br/>
								To (sic)</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<p><br/>
								unclouded<br/>
								as<br/>
								and<br/>
								Like thee to turn</p>
							</td>
							<td>
								<p>Dear Knight of Plympton,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5547" id="noteref-5547" epub:type="noteref">5547</a> teach me how<br/>
								To suffer with <em>unruffled</em> brow,<br/>
								And smile serene <em>like</em> thine,<br/>
								The jest uncouth <em>or</em> truth severe,<br/>
								<em>To such apply</em> my deafest ear,<br/>
								And calmly drink my wine.</p>
							</td>
							<td>
								<p><br/>
								<br/>
								<br/>
								<br/>
								To such I’ll turn</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<p><br/>
								attained<br/>
								invitation<br/>
								<br/>
								study<br/>
								meditation</p>
							</td>
							<td>
								<p>Thou say’st, not only skill is gain’d,<br/>
								But genius too may be <em>obtain’d</em>,<br/>
								By studious <em>imitation</em>;<br/>
								Thy temper mild, thy genius fine,<br/>
								I’ll <em>copy</em> till I make <em>them</em> mine,<br/>
								By constant <em>application</em>.</p>
							</td>
							<td>
								<p><br/>
								attained<br/>
								<br/>
								<br/>
								thee</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<p><br/>
								reverest (sic)<br/>
								<br/>
								Past</p>
							</td>
							<td>
								<p>Thy art of pleasing teach me, Garrick,<br/>
								Thou who <em>reversest</em> odes Pindarick,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5548" id="noteref-5548" epub:type="noteref">5548</a><br/>
								A second time read o’er;<br/>
								Oh! could we read thee backwards too,<br/>
								<em>Last</em> thirty years thou shouldst review,<br/>
								And charm us thirty more.</p>
							</td>
							<td>
								<p>
</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<p>
</p>
							</td>
							<td>
								<p id="IV-page-433">If I have thoughts and can’t express ’em,<br/>
								Gibbon shall teach me how to dress ’em<br/>
								In terms select and terse;<br/>
								Jones teach me modesty⁠—and Greek;<br/>
								Smith how to think; <em>Burke</em> how to speak,<br/>
								And Beauclerk to converse.</p>
							</td>
							<td>
								<p><br/>
								<br/>
								<br/>
								<br/>
								Burk</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<p><br/>
								<br/>
								free and easy<br/>
								<br/>
								like</p>
							</td>
							<p>Let Johnson teach me how to place<br/>
							In fairest light each borrowed grace,<br/>
							From him I’ll learn to write;<br/>
							Copy his <em>clear and easy</em> style, clear<br/>
							And from the roughness of his file, familiar like<br/>
							Grow <em>as</em> himself⁠—polite.”</p>
							<td>
								<p><br/>
								<br/>
								<br/>
								<br/>
								like</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>Horace Walpole, on <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 27, 1775, speaks of these verses as if they were fresh. ‘They are an answer,’ he writes, ‘to a gross brutality of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, to which a properer answer would have been to fling a glass of wine in his face. I have no patience with an unfortunate monster trusting to his helpless deformity for indemnity for any impertinence that his arrogance suggests, and who thinks that what he has read is an excuse for everything he says.’ Horace Walpole’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Letters</i>, vi 302. It is strange that Walpole should be so utterly ignorant of Johnson’s courage and bodily strength. The date of Walpole’s letter makes me suspect that Richard Burke dated his <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 6, 1775 (he should have written 1776), and that the blunder of a copyist has changed 1775 into 1773.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
