<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="appendix-13" epub:type="appendix">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Appendix</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Boswell’s Letters of Acceptance of the Office of Secretary for Foreign Correspondence to the Royal Academy</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p>(<i>Page 370, note <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>.)</p>
				<p>LETTER I.</p>
				<p id="III-page-462a">“Agli Illustrissimi Signori Il Presidente e Consiglieri dell” Academia<br/>
				Reale delle arti in Londra.</p>
				<p>“Avreste forse illustrissimi Signori potuto scegliere molte persone piu degne dell” ufficcio di Segretario per la corrispondenza straniera; ma non sarebbe, son certo, stato possibile di trovar alcuno dal quale questa distinzione sarebbe stata piu stimata. Sento con un animo molto riconoscente la parzialitá che l’Academia a ben voluto mostrar per me; e mi conto felicissimo che la mia elezione sia stata graziosamente confirmata dalla sua <a id="III-page-463" />Maestá lo stesso Sovrano che a fondato l’Academia, e che si é sempre mostrato il suo beneficente Protettore.</p>
				<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:roman">Vi</span> prego, Signori, di credere que porro ogni mio studio a contribuire tanto che potro alia prosperita della nostra instituzione ch” é gia arrivata ad un punto si rispettevole.</p>
				<p>“Ho l’onore d’essere, “Illustrissimi Signori, “Vostro umilissimo, ’e divotissimo servo, “Giacomo Boswell.” “Londra, ’31 d’Ottobre, 1791.”</p>
				<p>LETTER. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.</p>
				<p>“A Messieurs Le President et les autres Membres du Conseil de l’Academie<br/>
				Royale des Arts à Londres.</p>
				<p>“Messieurs,</p>
				<p>“C’est avec la plus vive reconnoissance que J’accepte la charge de<br/>
				Secretaire pour la Correspondence etrangêre de votre Academie á laquelle<br/>
				J’ai eu l’honneur d’etre choisi par vos suffrages unanimes gracieusement<br/>
				confirmés par sa Majesté.</p>
				<p>“Ce choix spontané Messieurs me flatte beaucoup; et m’inspire des desirs les plus ardens de m’en montrer digne, au moins par la promptitude avec laquelle Je saisirai toute occasion de faire ce que Je pourrai pour contribuer á l’avantage des Arts et la celebrité de l’Academie.</p>
				<p>“J’ai l’honneur d’etre avec toute la consideration possible,</p>
				<p>“Messieurs,</p>
				<p>“Votre serviteur tres obligé tres humble et tres fidel,<br/>
				“Boswell.”<br/>
				“A Londres,<br/>
				“ce 31 d’Octobre, 1791’</p>
				<p>[In this letter I have made no attempt to correct Boswell’s errors.]</p>
				<p>LETTER <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>.</p>
				<p>“To the President and Council of The Royal Academy of Arts in London.</p>
				<p>“Gentlemen,</p>
				<p>“Your unsolicited and unanimous election of me to be Secretary for Foreign Correspondence to your Academy, and the gracious confirmation of my election by his Majesty, I acknowledge with the warmest sentiments of gratitude and respect.</p>
				<p>“I have always loved the Arts, and during my travels on the Continent I did not neglect the opportunities which I had of cultivating a taste for them.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5545" id="noteref-5545" epub:type="noteref">5545</a> That taste I trust will now be much improved, when I shall be so happy as <a id="III-page-464" />to share in the advantages which the Royal Academy affords; and I fondly embrace this very pleasing distinction as giving me the means of providing additional solace for the future years of my life.</p>
				<p>“Be assured, Gentlemen, that as I am proud to be a member of an Academy which has the peculiar felicity of not being at all dependant on a Minister,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5546" id="noteref-5546" epub:type="noteref">5546</a> but under the immediate patronage and superintendence of the Sovereign himself, I shall be zealous to do everything in my power that can be of any service to our excellent Institution.</p>
				<p>“I have the honour to be,</p>
				<p>“Gentlemen,</p>
				<p>“Your much obliged</p>
				<p>“And faithful humble servant,</p>
				<p>“James Boswell.<!-- signature -->”</p>
				<p>“London,</p>
				<p>’31 October, 1791.”</p>
				<p>LETTER <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>.</p>
				<p>“Sir,<!-- salutation --></p>
				<p>“I am much obliged to you for the very polite terms in which you have been pleased to communicate to me my election to be Secretary for Foreign Correspondence to the Royal Academy of Arts in London; and I request that you will lay before the President and Council the enclosed letters signifying my acceptance of that office.</p>
				<p>“I am with great regard,</p>
				<p>“Sir,</p>
				<p>“Your most obedient humble servant,</p>
				<p>“James Boswell<!-- signature -->.”</p>
				<p>“London,</p>
				<p>’31 October, 1791.</p>
				<p>“To John Richards, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, R.A. <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>’</p>
				<p>Bennet Langton’s letter of acceptance of the Professorship of Ancient<br/>
				Literature in the place of Johnson is dated April 2, 1788.</p>
				<p>I must express my acknowledgments to the President and Council of the Royal Academy for their kindness in allowing me to copy the above letters from the originals that are in their possession.</p>
				<!--volume 4-->
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
