<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix XVI: The Club in Ivy-Lane</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="appendix-16" epub:type="appendix">
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Appendix</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</span>
					</h2>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Club in Ivy-Lane</h3>
				</hgroup>
				<p>(Page 253<i>.)</i></p>
				<p>Hawkins gives the two following notes:⁠—</p>
				<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
				<p>“As <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ryland was talking with me of old friends and past times, we warmed ourselves into a wish, that all who remained of the club should meet and dine at the house which once was Horseman’s, in Ivy-lane. I have undertaken to solicit you, and therefore desire you to tell on what day next week you can conveniently meet your old friends.</p>
				<p>“I am, Sir,</p>
				<p>“Your most humble servant,</p>
				<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
				<p>“Bolt-court, <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 22, 1783.”</p>
				<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
				<p>“In perambulating Ivy-lane, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ryland found neither our landlord Horseman, nor his successor. The old house is shut up, and he liked not the appearance of any near it; he therefore bespoke our dinner at the Queen’s Arms, in <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s Church-yard, where, at half an hour after three, your company will be desired to-day by those who remain of our former society.</p>
				<p>“Your humble servant,</p>
				<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
				<p>“<abbr>Dec.</abbr> 3.”</p>
				<p>Four met⁠—Johnson, Hawkins, Ryland, and Payne (ante<i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 243).</i></p>
				<p>“We dined,” Hawkins continues, “and in the evening regaled with coffee. At ten we broke up, much to the regret of Johnson, who proposed staying; but finding us inclined to separate, he left us with a sigh that seemed to come from his heart, lamenting that he was retiring to solitude and cheerless meditation.” Hawkins’s Johnson<i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 562.</i></p>
				<p>Hawkins is mistaken in saying that they had a second meeting at a tavern at the end of a month; for Johnson, on March 10, 1784, wrote:⁠—</p>
				<p>“I have been confined from the fourteenth of December, and know not when I shall get out.” Piozzi Letters<i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 351.</i></p>
				<p>He thus describes these meetings:⁠—</p>
				<p>“<abbr>Dec.</abbr> 13. I dined about a fortnight ago with three old friends; we had not met together for thirty years, and one of us thought the other grown very old. In the thirty years two of our set have died; our meeting may be supposed to be somewhat tender.” Piozzi Letters<i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 339.</i></p>
				<p>“<abbr>Jan.</abbr> 12, 1784. I had the same old friends to dine with me on Wednesday, and may say that since I lost sight of you I have had one pleasant day.” Ib. <abbr>p.</abbr> 346.</p>
				<p>“April 15, 1784. Yesterday I had the pleasure of giving another dinner to the remainder of the old club. We used to meet weekly, about the year fifty, and we were as cheerful as in former times; only I could not make quite so much noise, for since the paralytick affliction my voice is sometimes weak.” Ib. <abbr>p.</abbr> 361.</p>
				<p>“April 19, 1784. The people whom I mentioned in my letter are the remnant of a little club that used to meet in Ivy-lane about three and thirty years ago, out of which we have lost Hawkesworth and Dyer; the rest are yet on this side the grave. Our meetings now are serious, and I think on all parts tender.” Ib. 363.</p>
				<p>See ante<i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 191, note 5.</i></p>
				<p>
					<a id="id_2HAPP6">
						<!-- H2 anchor -->
					</a>
				</p>
				<p> </p>
				<p> </p>
				<p> </p>
				<p> </p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
