<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="appendices" id="appendix-15" epub:type="appendix">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Appendix</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Johnson and Priestly</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>(<i>Page 238.</i>)</p>
			<p id="IV-page-433a">Had Boswell continued the quotation from Priestley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Illustrations of Philosophical Necessity</i> he would have shown that though Priestley could not <em>hate</em> the rioters, he could very easily <em>prosecute</em> them. He says:⁠—</p>
			<p>“If as a Necessarian I cease to <em>blame</em> men for their vices in the ultimate sense of the word, though, in the common and proper sense of it, I continue to do as much as other persons (for how necessarily soever they act, they are <a id="IV-page-434"/>influenced by a base and mischievous disposition of mind, against which I must guard myself and others in proportion as I love myself and others),” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Priestley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Works</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> 508.</p>
			<p>Of his interview with Johnson, Priestley, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Appeal to the Public</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, published in 1792 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Works</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span> 502), thus writes, answering “the impudent falsehood that when I was at Oxford <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson left a company on my being introduced to it”:⁠—</p>
			<p>“In fact we never were at Oxford at the same time, and the only interview I ever had with him was at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Paradise’s, where we dined together at his own request. He was particularly civil to me, and promised to call upon me the next time he should go through Birmingham. He behaved with the same civility to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Price, when they supped together at <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Adams’s at Oxford. Several circumstances show that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson had not so much of bigotry at the decline of life as had distinguished him before, on which account it is well known to all our common acquaintance, that I declined all their pressing solicitations to be introduced to him.”</p>
			<p>Priestley expresses himself ill, but his meaning can be made out. Parr answered Boswell in the March number of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i> for 1795, <abbr>p.</abbr> 179. But the evidence that he brings is rendered needless by Priestley’s positive statement. May peace henceforth fall on “Priestley’s injured name.” (<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barbauld’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Poems</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> 243.)</p>
			<p>When Boswell asserts that Johnson “was particularly resolute in not giving countenance to men whose writings he considered as pernicious to society,” he forgets that that very summer of 1783 he had been willing to dine at Wilkes’s house (see <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4927">this note</a>).</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Franklin (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1833, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> 157) wrote to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Price in 1784:⁠—“It is said that scarce anybody but yourself and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Priestley possesses the art of knowing how to differ decently.” Gibbon (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Misc.</abbr> Works</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 304), describing in 1789 the honestest members of the French Assembly, calls them “a set of wild visionaries, like our <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Price, who gravely debate, and dream about the establishment of a pure and perfect democracy of five and twenty millions, the virtues of the golden age, and the primitive rights and equality of mankind.” Admiration of Price made Samuel Rogers, when a boy, wish to be a preacher. “I thought there was nothing on earth so <em>grand</em> as to figure in a pulpit. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Price lived much in the society of Lord Lansdowne [Earl of Shelburne] and other people of rank; and his manners were extremely polished. In the pulpit he was great indeed.” Rogers’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Table Talk</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 3.</p>
			<p>The full title of the tract mentioned by Boswell is, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">A Small Whole-Length of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Priestley from His Printed Works</i>. It was published in 1792, and is a very poor piece of writing.</p>
			<p>Johnson had refused to meet the Abbé Raynal, the author of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Histoire Philosophique et Politique du Commerce des Deux Indes</i>, when he was over in England in 1777. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Chapone, writing to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Carter on June 15 of that year, says:⁠—</p>
			<p id="IV-page-435">“I suppose you have heard a great deal of the Abbé Raynal, who is in London. I fancy you would have served him as <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson did, to whom when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vesey introduced him, he turned from him, and said he had read his book, and would have nothing to say to him.” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Chapone’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Posthumous Works</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 172.</p>
			<p>See Walpole’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Letters</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 421, and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> 444. His book was burnt by the common hangman in Paris. Carlyle’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">French Revolution</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1857, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 45.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
