<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix XX: Notes on Boswell’s note</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="appendices" id="appendix-20" epub:type="appendix">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Appendix</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Notes on Boswell’s note</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>(Notes on Boswell’s note on page 408.)</p>
			<p id="IV-page-442">[G-1] <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Piozzi records (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anecdotes</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 120) that Johnson told her⁠—</p>
			<p>“When Boyse was almost perishing with hunger, and some money was produced to purchase him a dinner, he got a bit of roast beef, but could not eat it without ketchup; and laid out the last half-guinea he possessed in truffles and mushrooms, eating them in bed too, for want of clothes, or even a shirt to sit up in.”</p>
			<p>Hawkins (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 159) gives 1740 as the year of Boyse’s destitution.</p>
			<p>“He was,” he says, “confined to a bed which had no sheets; here, to procure food, he wrote; his posture sitting up in bed, his only covering a blanket, in which a hole was made to admit of the employment of his arm.”</p>
			<p>Two years later Boyse wrote the following verses to Cave from a sponging-house:⁠—</p>
			<p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<p>“Hodie, teste coelo summo, Sine pane, sine nummo, Sorte positus infeste, Scribo tibi dolens moeste. Fame, bile tumet jecur: Urbane, mitte opem, precor. Tibi enim cor humanum Non a malis alienum: Mihi mens nee male grato, Pro a te favore dato. Ex gehenna debitoria, Vulgo, domo spongiatoria.”</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</p>
			<p>He adds that he hopes to have his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Ode on the British Nation</i> done that day. This <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Ode</i>, which is given in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i> 1742, <abbr>p.</abbr> 383, contains the following verse, which contrasts sadly with the poor poet’s case:⁠—</p>
			<p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<p>“Thou, sacred isle, amidst thy ambient main, Enjoyst the sweets of freedom <em>all thy own</em>.”</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</p>
			<p>[G-2] It is not likely that Johnson called a sixpence “a serious consideration.” He who in his youth would not let his comrades say prodigious (see <a href="part-3.xhtml#III-page-303">here</a>) was not likely in his old age so to misuse a word.</p>
			<p>[G-3] Hugh Kelly is mentioned in <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1601">this note</a>, and <a href="part-3.xhtml#III-page-113">here</a>.</p>
			<p>[G-4] It was not on the return from Sky, but on the voyage from Sky to Rasay, that the spurs were lost. <i>Post</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 163.</p>
			<p id="IV-page-443">[G-5] <abbr>Dr.</abbr> White’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bampton Lectures</i> of 1784 “became part of the triumphant literature of the University of Oxford,” and got the preacher a Christ Church Canonry. Of these <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lectures</i> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Parr had written about one-fifth part. White, writing to Parr about a passage in the manuscript of the last Lecture, said:⁠—“I fear I did not clearly explain myself; I humbly beg the favour of you to make my meaning more intelligible.” On the death of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Badcock in 1788, a note for £500 from White was found in his pocketbook. White pretended that this was remuneration for some other work; but it was believed on good grounds that Badcock had begun what Parr had completed, and that these famous <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lectures</i> were mainly their work. Badcock was one of the writers in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Monthly Review</i>. Johnstone’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Parr</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 218⁠–⁠278. For Badcock’s correspondence with the editor of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Monthly Review</i>, see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bodleian</i> <abbr>MS.</abbr> Add. C. 90.</p>
			<p>[G-6] “Virgilium vidi tantum.” Ovid, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tristia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 10. 51.</p>
			<p>[G-7] Mackintosh says of Priestley:⁠—“Frankness and disinterestedness in the avowal of his opinion were his point of honour.” He goes on to point out that there was “great mental power in him wasted and scattered.” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Mackintosh</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 349. See <a href="part-2.xhtml#II-page-124">here</a>, and see <a href="part-4.xhtml#IV-page-238">here</a> for Johnson’s opinion of Priestley.</p>
			<p>[G-8] Badcock, in using the term “index-scholar,” was referring no doubt to Pope’s lines:⁠—</p>
			<p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td>
								<p>“How Index-learning turns no student pale, Yet holds the eel of science by the tail.”</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Dunciad</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 279.</p>
			<p>
				<a id="id_2HAPP10">
					<!-- H2 anchor -->
				</a>
			</p>
			<p> </p>
			<p> </p>
			<p> </p>
			<p> </p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
