<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
	"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
	<title></title>
	<meta name="generator" content="BBEdit 14.0" />
</head>
<body>
<h2>APPENDIX A.</h2>

<p>(<i>Page</i> 314.)</p>

<p>The alehouse in the city where Johnson used to go and sit with George
Psalmanazar was, no doubt, the club in Old Street, where he met also
'the metaphysical tailor,' the uncle of Hoole the poet (<i>post</i>, under
March 30, 1783). Psalmanazar is mentioned a third time by Boswell
(<i>post</i>, May 15, 1784) in a passage borrowed from Hawkins's edition of
Johnson's <i>Works</i>, xi. 206, where it is stated that 'Johnson said: "He
had never seen the close of the life of any one that he wished so much
his own to resemble as that of him, for its purity and devotion." He was
asked whether he ever contradicted him. "I should as soon," said he,
"have thought of contradicting a bishop." When he was asked whether he
had ever mentioned Formosa before him, he said, "he was afraid to
mention even China."' We learn from Hawkins's <i>Life of Johnson</i>, p. 547,
that 'Psalmanazar lived in Ironmonger Row, Old Street; in the
neighbourhood whereof he was so well known and esteemed, that, as Dr.
Hawkesworth once told me, scarce any person, even children, passed him
without shewing him the usual signs of respect.' In the list of the
writers of the <i>Universal History</i> that Johnson drew up a few days
before his death his name is given as the historian of the Jews, Gauls,
and Spaniards (<i>post</i>, November, 1784). According to Mrs. Piozzi
(<i>Anecdotes</i>, p. 175):—'His pious and patient endurance of a tedious
illness, ending in an exemplary death, confirmed the strong impression
his merit had made upon the mind of Mr. Johnson. "It is so very
difficult," said he always, "for a sick man not to be a scoundrel."'
Johnson, in <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, p. 102, mentions him as a man
'whose life was, I think, uniform.' Smollett, in <i>Humphry Clinker</i> (in
Melford's Letter of June 10), describes him as one 'who, after having
drudged half a century in the literary mill, in all the simplicity and
abstinence of an Asiatic, subsists upon the charity of a few
booksellers, just sufficient to keep him from the parish.' A writer in
the <i>Annual Register</i> for 1764 (ii. 71), speaking of the latter part of
his life, says:—'He was concerned in compiling and writing works of
credit, and lived exemplarily for many years.' He died a few days before
that memorable sixteenth day of May 1763, when Boswell first met
Johnson. It is a pity that no record has been kept of the club meetings
in Ironmonger Row, for then we should have seen Johnson in a new light.
Johnson in an alehouse club, with a metaphysical tailor on one side of
him, and an aged writer on the other side of him, 'who spoke English
with the city accent and coarsely enough,'[1370] and whom he would never
venture to contradict, is a Johnson that we cannot easily imagine.</p>

<p>Of the greater part of Psalmanazar's life we know next to
nothing—little, I believe, beyond the few facts that I have here
gathered together. His early years he has described in his <i>Memoirs</i>.
That he started as one of the most shameless impostors, and that he
remained a hypocrite and a cheat till he was fully forty, if not indeed
longer, his own narrative shows. That for many years he lived
laboriously, frugally, and honestly seems to be no less certain. How far
his <i>Memoirs</i> are truthful is somewhat doubtful. In them he certainly
confesses the impudent trick which he had played in his youth, when he
passed himself off as a Formosan convert. He wished, he writes, 'to
undeceive the world by unravelling that whole mystery of iniquity' (p.
5). He lays bare roguery enough, and in a spirit, it seems, of real
sorrow. Nevertheless there are passages which are not free from the
leaven of hypocrisy, and there are, I suspect, statements which are at
least partly false. Johnson, indeed, looked upon him as little less than
a saint; but then, as Sir Joshua Reynolds tells us, though 'Johnson was
not easily imposed upon by professions to honesty and candour, he
appeared to have little suspicion of hypocrisy in religion.'[1371] It was
in the year 1704 that Psalmanazar published his <i>Historical and
Geographical Description of Formosa</i>. So gross is the forgery that it
almost passes belief that it was widely accepted as a true narrative. He
gave himself out as a native of that island and a convert to
Christianity. He lied so foolishly as to maintain that in the Academies
of Formosa Greek was studied (p. 290). He asserted also that in an
island that is only about half as large as Ireland 18,000 boys were
sacrificed every year (p. 176). But his readers were for the most part
only too willing to be deceived; for in Protestant England his abuse of
the Jesuits covered a multitude of lies. Ere he had been three months in
London, he was, he writes (<i>Memoirs</i>, p. 179), 'cried up for a prodigy,
and not only the domestic, but even the foreign papers had helped to
blaze forth many things in his praise.' He was aided in his fraud by the
Rev. Dr. Innes, or Innys, a clergyman of the English Church, who by
means of his interesting convert pushed himself into the notice of
Compton, Bishop of London, and before long was made chaplain-general to
the English forces in Portugal (<i>Memoirs</i>, p. 191). The same man, as
Boswell tells us (<i>ante</i>, i. 359), by another impudent cheat, a second
time obtained 'considerable promotion.' Psalmanazar's book soon reached
a second edition, 'besides the several versions it had abroad' (p. 5).
Yet it is very dull reading—just such a piece of work as might be
looked for from a young man of little fancy, but gifted with a strong
memory. Nevertheless, the author's credit lasted so long, that for many
years he lived on a subscription 'which was founded on a belief of his
being a Formosan and a real convert to the Church of England' (p. 208).
He was even sent to Oxford to study, and had rooms in one of the
colleges—Christ Church, if I mistake not (p. 186). It was not only as a
student that he was sent by his dupes to that ancient seat of learning;
the Bishop of London hoped that he would 'teach the Formosan language to
a set of gentlemen who were afterwards to go with him to convert those
people to Christianity' (p. 161).</p>

<p>While he was living the life of a lying scoundrel, he was, he says (p.
192), 'happily restrained by Divine Grace,' so that 'all sense of
remorse was not extinguished,' and there was no fall into 'downright
infidelity.' At length he picked up Law's <i>Serious Call</i>, which moved
him, as later on it moved better men (<i>ante</i>, i. 68). Step by step he
got into a way of steady work, and lived henceforth a laborious and
honest life. It was in the year 1728, thirty-five years before his
death, that he began, he says, to write the narrative of his imposture
(p. 59). A dangerous illness and the dread of death had deeply moved
him, and filled him with the desire of leaving behind 'a faithful
narrative' which would 'undeceive the world.' Nineteen years later,
though he did not publish his narrative, he made a public confession of
his guilt. In the unsigned article on Formosa, which he wrote in 1747
for Bowen's <i>Complete System of Geography</i> (ii. 251), he says,
'Psalmanaazaar [so he had at one time written his name] hath long since
ingenuously owned the contrary [of the truthfulness of his narrative]
though not in so public a manner, as he might perhaps have done, had not
such an avowment been likely to have affected some few persons who for
private ends took advantage of his youthful vanity to encourage him in
an imposture, which he might otherwise never had the thought, much less
the confidence, to have carried on. These persons being now dead, and
out of all danger of being hurt by it, he now gives us leave to assure
the world that the greatest part of that account was fabulous … and
that he designs to leave behind him a faithful account of that unhappy
step, and other particulars of his life leading to it, to be published
after his death.'</p>

<p>In his <i>Memoirs</i> he will not, he writes (p. 59), give any account 'of
his real country or family.' Yet it is quite clear from his own
narrative that he was born in the south of France. 'His pronunciation of
French had,' it was said, 'a spice of the Gascoin accent, and in that
provincial dialect he was so masterly that none but those born in the
country could excel him' (Preface, p. 1). If a town can be found that
answers to all that he tells of his birth-place, his whole account may
be true; but the circumstances that he mentions seem inconsistent. The
city in which he was born was twenty-four miles from an archiepiscopal
city in which there was a college of Jesuits (p. 67), and about sixty
miles from 'a noble great city full of gentry and nobility, of coaches,
and all kinds of grandeur,' the seat of a great university (pp. 76, 83).
When he left the great city for Avignon he speaks of himself as 'going
<i>down</i> to Avignon' (p. 87). Thence he started on a pilgrimage to Rome,
and in order to avoid his native place, after he had gone no great way,
'he wheeled about to the left, to leave the place at some twenty or
thirty miles distance' (p. 101). He changed his mind, however, and
returned home. Thence he set off to join his father, who was 'near 500
miles off' in Germany (p. 60). 'The direct route was through the great
university city' and Lyons (p. 104). His birth-place then, if his
account is true, was on the road from Avignon to Rome, sixty miles from
a great university city and southwards of it, for through this
university city passed the direct road from his home to Lyons. It was,
moreover, sixty miles from an archiepiscopal city. I do not think that
such a place can be found. He says (p. 59) that he thought himself
'obliged out of respect to his country and family to conceal both, it
being but too common, though unjust, to censure them for the crimes of
private persons.' The excuse seems unsatisfactory, for he tells enough
to shew that he came from the South of France, while for his family
there was no need of care. It was, he writes, 'ancient but decayed,' and
he was the only surviving child. Of his father and mother he had heard
nothing since he started on the career of a pious rogue. They must have
been dead very many years by the time his <i>Memoirs</i> were given to the
world. His story shews that at all events for the first part of his life
he had been one of the vainest of men, and vanity is commonly found
joined with a love of mystery. He is not consistent, moreover, in his
dates. On April 23, 1752, he was in the 73rd year of his age (p. 7); so
that he was born in either 1679 or 1680. When he joined his father he
was 'hardly full sixteen years old' (p. 112); yet it was a few years
after the Peace of Ryswick, which was signed on September 22, 1697. He
was, he says, 'but near twenty' when he wrote his <i>History of Formosa</i>
(p. 184). This was in the year 1704.</p>

<p>With his father he stayed but a short time, and then set out rambling
northwards. At Avignon, by shameless lying, he had obtained a pass 'as a
young student in theology, of Irish extract [<i>sic</i>] who had left his
country for the sake of religion' (p. 98). It was wonderful that his
fraud had escaped detection there, for he had kept his own name,
'because it had something of quality in it' (p. 99). He now resolved on
a more impudent pretence; for 'passing as an Irishman and a sufferer for
religion, did not only,' he writes, 'expose me to the danger of being
discovered, but came short of the merit and admiration I had expected
from it' (p. 112). He thereupon gave himself out as a Japanese convert,
and forged a fresh pass, 'clapping to it the old seal' (p. 116). He went
through different adventures, and at last enlisted in the army of the
Elector of Cologne—an 'unhappy herd, destitute of all sense of religion
and shamefacedness.' He got his discharge, but enlisted a second time,
'passing himself off for a Japanese and a heathen, under the name of
Salmanazar' (pp. 133-141). Later on he altered it, he says, 'by the
addition of a letter or two to make it somewhat different from that
mentioned in the <i>Book of Kings</i>' (Shalmaneser, II <i>Kings</i>, xvii. 3). In
his <i>Description of Formosa</i> he wrote it Psalmanaazaar, and in later
life Psalmanazar. In his vanity he invented 'an awkward show of worship,
turning his face to the rising or setting sun, and pleased to be taken
notice of for so doing' (p. 144). He had moreover 'the ambition of
passing for a moral heathen' (p. 147). By way of singularity he next
took to living altogether upon raw flesh, roots, and herbs (p. 163).</p>

<p>It was when he was on garrison duty at Sluys that he became acquainted
with Innes, who was chaplain to a Scotch regiment that was in the pay of
the Dutch (p. 148). This man found in him a tool ready made to his hand.
He had at once seen through his roguery, but he used his knowledge only
to plunge him deeper in his guilt. By working on his fears and his
vanity and by small bribes he induced him to profess himself a convert
to the Church of England and to submit to baptism (p. 158). He brought
him over to London, and introduced him to the Bishop of London, and to
Tenison, Archbishop of Canterbury (pp. 164, 179). Psalmanazar spoke
Latin fluently, but 'his Grace had either forgotten his, or being unused
to the foreign pronunciation was forced to have it interpreted to him by
Dr. Innes in English' (p. 178). The young impostor everywhere gave
himself out as a Formosan who had been entrapped by a Jesuit priest, and
brought to Avignon. 'There I could expect,' he wrote, 'no mercy from the
Inquisitors, if I had not in hypocrisy professed their religion'
(<i>History of Formosa</i>, p. 25). He was kept, he says, in a kind of
custody, 'but I trusted under God to my heels' (p. 24). It was Innes who
made him write this <i>History</i>.</p>

<p>In the confession of his fraud Psalmanazar seems to keep back nothing.
His repentance appears to be sincere, and his later life, there can be
little question, was regular. Yet, as I have said, even his confessions
apparently are not free from the old leaven of hypocrisy. It is indeed
very hard, if not altogether impossible, for a man who has passed forty
years and more as a lying hypocrite altogether to 'clear his mind of
cant.' In writing of the time when he was still living the life of a
lying scoundrel, he says:—'I have great reason to acknowledge it the
greatest mercy that could befall me, that I was so well grounded in the
principles and evidence of the Christian religion, that neither the
conversation of the then freethinkers, as they loved to stile
themselves, and by many of whom I was severely attacked, nor the
writings of Hobbes, Spinosa, &amp;c. against the truth of Divine revelation
could appear to me in any other light than as the vain efforts of a
dangerous set of men to overturn a religion, the best founded and most
judiciously calculated to promote the peace and happiness of mankind,
both temporal and eternal' (<i>Memoirs</i>, p. 192). Two pages further on he
writes, a little boastfully it seems, of having had 'some sort of
gallantry with the fair sex; with many of whom, even persons of fortune
and character, of sense, wit, and learning, I was become,' he continues,
'a great favourite, and might, if I could have overcome my natural
sheepishness and fear of a repulse, have been more successful either by
way of matrimony or intrigue.' He goes on:—'I may truly say, that
hardly any man who might have enjoyed so great a variety ever indulged
himself in so few instances of the unlawful kind as I have done.' He
concludes this passage in his writings by 'thankfully acknowledging that
there must have been some secret providence that kept me from giving
such way to unlawful amours as I might otherwise have done, to the ruin
of my health, circumstances,' &amp;c.</p>

<p>When he came to wish for an honest way of life he was beset with
difficulties. 'What a deadly wound,' he writes, 'must such an unexpected
confession have given to my natural vanity, and what a mortification
would it have been to such sincere honest people [as my friends] to hear
it from my mouth!' (p. 213.) This was natural enough. That he long
hesitated, like a coward, on the brink is not to be cast in his teeth,
seeing that at last he took the plunge. But then in speaking of the time
when he weakly repeated, and to use his own words, 'as it were confirmed
anew,' his old falsehoods, he should not have written that 'as the
assurance of God's mercy gave me good grounds to hope, so that hope
inspired me with a design to use all proper means to obtain it, and
leave the issue of it to his Divine Providence' (p. 214). The only
proper means to obtain God's mercy was at once to own to all the world
that he had lied. It is only the Tartuffes and the Holy Willies who,
whilst they persist in their guilt, talk of leaving the issue to the
Divine Providence of God.</p>

<p>Since this Appendix was in type I have learnt, through the kindness of
Mr. C.E. Doble, the editor of Hearne's <i>Remarks and Collections</i>, ed.
1885, that a passage in that book (i. 271), confirms my conjecture that
Psalmanazar was lodged in Christ Church when at Oxford. Hearne says
(July 9, 1706):—'Mr. Topping of Christ Church … also tells me that
Salmanezzer, the famous Formosan, when he left Christ Church (where he
resided while in Oxon) left behind him a Book in MSt., wherein a
distinct acct was given of the Consular and Imperial coyns by himself.'
Mr. Doble has also pointed out to me in the first edition of the
<i>Spectator</i> the following passage at the end of No. 14:—</p>

<h5>'ADVERTISEMENT.</h5>

<p>'On the first of April will be performed at the Play-house in the
Hay-market an opera call'd <i>The Cruelty of Atreus</i>. N.B. The Scene
wherein Thyestes eats his own children is to be performed by the famous
Mr. Psalmanazar lately arrived from Formosa: The whole Supper being set
to Kettle-drums.'</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<h2>APPENDIX B.</h2>

<h4>JOHNSON'S TRAVELS AND LOVE OF TRAVELLING.</h4>

<p>(<i>Page 352</i>).</p>

<p>On the passage in the text Macaulay in his Review of Croker's Edition of
<i>Boswell's Life of Johnson</i> partly founds the following criticism:—</p>

<p>'Johnson's visit to the Hebrides introduced him to a state of society
completely new to him; and a salutary suspicion of his own deficiencies
seems on that occasion to have crossed his mind for the first time. He
confessed, in the last paragraph of his <i>Journey</i>, that his thoughts on
national manners were the thoughts of one who had seen but little, of
one who had passed his time almost wholly in cities. This feeling,
however, soon passed away. It is remarkable that to the last he
entertained a fixed contempt for all those modes of life and those
studies which tend to emancipate the mind from the prejudices of a
particular age or a particular nation. Of foreign travel and of history
he spoke with the fierce and boisterous contempt of ignorance. "What
does a man learn by travelling? Is Beauclerk the better for travelling?
What did Lord Charlemont learn in his travels, except that there was a
snake in one of the pyramids of Egypt?"' Macaulay's <i>Essays</i>, ed. 1843,
i. 403.</p>

<p>In another passage (p. 400) Macaulay says:—</p>

<p>'Johnson was no master of the great science of human nature. He had
studied, not the genus man, but the species Londoner. Nobody was ever so
thoroughly conversant with all the forms of life and all the shades of
moral and intellectual character which were to be seen from Islington to
the Thames, and from Hyde-Park corner to Mile-end green. But his
philosophy stopped at the first turnpike-gate. Of the rural life of
England he knew nothing, and he took it for granted that everybody who
lived in the country was either stupid or miserable.'</p>

<p>Of the two assertions that Macaulay makes in these two passages, while
one is for the most part true, the other is utterly and grossly false.
Johnson had no contempt for foreign travel. That curiosity which
animated his eager mind in so many parts of learning did not fail him,
when his thoughts turned to the great world outside our narrow seas. It
was his poverty that confined him so long to the neighbourhood of Temple
Bar. He must in these early days have sometimes felt with Arviragus when
he says:—</p>

<p>'What should we speak of<br/>

When we are old as you? when we shall hear<br/>

The rain and wind beat dark December, how<br/>

In this our pinching cave, shall we discourse<br/>

The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing.'<br/>
</p>

<p>With his pension his wanderings at once began. His friendship with the
Thrales gave them a still wider range. His curiosity, which in itself
was always eager, was checked in his more prosperous circumstances by
his years, his natural unwillingness at any one moment to make an
effort, and by the want of travelling companions who were animated by a
spirit of inquiry and of enterprise equal to his own. He did indeed
travel much more than is commonly thought, and was far less frequently
to be seen rolling along Fleet-street or stemming the full tide of human
existence at Charing Cross than his biographers would have us believe.</p>

<p>The following table, imperfect though it must necessarily be, shows how
large a part of his life he passed outside 'the first turnpike-gate,'
and beyond the smoke of London:—</p>

<p>1709-1736. The first twenty-seven years of his life he spent in small
country towns or villages—Lichfield, Stourbridge, Oxford,
Market-Bosworth, Birmingham. So late as 1781 Lichfield did not contain
4,000 inhabitants (Harwood's <i>History of Lichfield</i>, p. 380); eight
years later it was reckoned that a little over 8,000 people dwelt in
Oxford (Parker's <i>Early History of Oxford</i>, ed. 1885, p. 229). In 1732
or 1733 Birmingham, when Johnson first went to live there, had not, I
suppose, a population of 10,000. Its growth was wonderfully rapid.
Between 1770 and 1797 its inhabitants increased from 30,000 to nearly
80,000 (<i>Birmingham Directory for</i> 1780, p. xx, and <i>A Brief History of
Birmingham</i>, p. 8).</p>

<p>1736-7. The first eighteen months of his married life he lived quite in
the country at Edial, two miles from Lichfield. <i>Ante</i>, i. 97.</p>

<p>1737. He was twenty-eight years old when he removed to London. <i>Ante</i>,
i. 110.</p>

<p>1739. He paid a visit to Appleby in Leicestershire and to Ashbourn.
<i>Ante</i>, i. 82, 133 note 1.</p>

<p>1754. Oxford. July and August, about five weeks. <i>Ante</i>, i. 270, note 5.</p>

<p>1759. Oxford. July, length of visit not mentioned. <i>Ante</i>, i. 347.</p>

<p>1761-2. Lichfield. Winter, a visit of five days. <i>Ante</i>, i. 370.</p>

<p>1762. In the summer of this year his pension was granted, and he
henceforth had the means of travelling. <i>Ante</i>, i. 372.</p>

<p>A trip to Devonshire, from Aug. 16 to Sept. 26; six weeks. <i>Ante</i>, i.
377.</p>

<p>Oxford. December. 'I am going for a few days or weeks to Oxford.' Letter
of Dec. 21, 1762. Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 129.</p>

<p>1763. Harwich. August, a few days. <i>Ante</i>, i. 464.</p>

<p>Oxford. October, length of visit not mentioned. A letter dated Oxford,<br/>

Oct. 27 [1763]. Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 161.<br/>
</p>

<p>1764. Langton in Lincolnshire, part of January and February. <i>Ante</i>, i.
476.</p>

<p>Easton Maudit in Northamptonshire, part of June, July, and August.<br/>

Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 166, note, and <i>ante</i>, i. 486.<br/>
</p>

<p>Oxford, October. Letter to Mr. Strahan dated Oxford, Oct. 24, 1764.
<i>Post, Addenda</i> to vol. v.</p>

<p>Either this year or the next Johnson made the acquaintance of the
Thrales. For the next seventeen years he had 'an apartment appropriated
to him in the Thrales' villa at Streatham' (<i>ante</i>, i. 493), a handsome
house that stood in a small park. Streatham was a quiet country-village,
separated by wide commons from London, on one of which a highwayman had
been hanged who had there robbed Mr. Thrale (<i>ante</i>, iii. 239, note 2).
According to Mrs. Piozzi Johnson commonly spent the middle of the week
at their house, coming on the Monday night and returning to his own home
on the Saturday (<i>post</i>, iv. 169, note 3). Miss Burney, in 1778,
describes him 'as living almost wholly at Streatham' (<i>ante</i>, i. 493,
note 3). No doubt she was speaking chiefly of the summer half of the
year, for in the winter time the Thrales would be often in their town
house, where he also had his apartment. Mr. Strahan complained of his
being at Streatham 'in a great measure absorbed from the society of his
old friends' (<i>ante</i>, iii. 225). He used to call it 'my <i>home</i>' (<i>ante</i>,
i. 493, note 3).</p>

<p>1765. Cambridge, early in the year; a short visit. <i>Ante</i>, i. 487.</p>

<p>Brighton, autumn; a short visit. Piozzi's <i>Anec</i>. p. 126, and <i>Piozzi<br/>

Letters</i>, i. 1.<br/>
</p>

<p>1766. Streatham, summer and autumn; more than three months. Ante, ii.
25, and <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 71.</p>

<p>Oxford, autumn; a month. <i>Ante</i>, ii. 25.</p>

<p>1767. Lichfield, summer and autumn; 'near six months.' <i>Ante</i>, ii. 30,
and <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 4, 5.</p>

<p>1768. Oxford, spring; several weeks. <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 6-15.</p>

<p>Townmalling in Kent, September; apparently a short visit. <i>Pr. and Med</i>.
p. 81.</p>

<p>1769. Oxford, from at least May 18 to July 7. <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i.
19-23, and <i>ante</i>, ii. 67.</p>

<p>Lichfield and Ashbourn, August; a short visit. <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 24,
and <i>ante</i>, ii. 67.</p>

<p>Brighton, part of August and September; some weeks. <i>Ante</i>, ii. 68, 70,
and Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 198, letter dated 'Brighthelmstone. August
26, 1769.'</p>

<p>1770. Lichfield and Ashbourn, apparently whole of July. <i>Piozzi
Letters</i>, i. 26-32.</p>

<p>1771. Lichfield and Ashbourn, from June 20 to after Aug. 5. <i>Ante</i>, ii.
141, 142, and <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 36-54.</p>

<p>1772. Lichfield and Ashbourn, from about Oct. 15 to early in December.
<i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 55-69.</p>

<p>1773. Oxford, April; a hurried visit. <i>Ante</i>, ii. 235, note 2.</p>

<p>Tour to Scotland from Aug. 6 to Nov. 26. <i>Ante</i>, ii. 265, 268.</p>

<p>Oxford, part of November and December. <i>Ante</i>, ii. 268.</p>

<p>1774. Tour to North Wales (Derbyshire, Chester, Conway, Anglesey,
Snowdon, Shrewsbury, Worcester, Birmingham, Oxford, Beaconsfield) from
July 5 to Sept. 30. <i>Ante</i>, ii. 285, and <i>post</i>, v. 427.</p>

<p>1775. Oxford, March; a short visit. <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 212.</p>

<p>Oxford, Lichfield, Ashbourn, from end of May till some time in August.
<i>Ante</i>, ii. 381, and <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 223-301.</p>

<p>Brighton; apparently a brief visit in September. Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p.
459.</p>

<p>A tour to Paris (going by Calais and Rouen and returning by Compiegne,
St. Quintin, and Calais), from Sept. 15 to Nov. 12. <i>Ante</i>, ii. 384,
401.</p>

<p>1776. Oxford, Lichfield, Ashbourn, March 19-29. (The trip was cut short
by young Thrale's death.) <i>Ante</i>, ii. 438, and iii. 4.</p>

<p>Bath, from the middle of April to the beginning of May. <i>Ante</i>, iii. 44,
51.</p>

<p>Brighton, part of September and October; full seven weeks. <i>Ante</i>, iii.
92.</p>

<p>1777. Oxford, Lichfield, and Ashbourn, from about July 28 to about Nov.
6. <i>Ante</i>, iii. 129, 210, and <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 348-396 and ii. 1-16
(the letter of Oct. 3, i. 396, is wrongly dated, as is shown by the
mention of Foote's death).</p>

<p>Brighton, November; a visit of three days. <i>Ante</i>, iii. 210.</p>

<p>1778. Warley Camp, in Essex, September; about a week. <i>Ante</i>, iii. 360.</p>

<p>1779. Lichfield, Ashbourn, from May 20 to end of June. <i>Ante</i>, iii. 395,
and <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 44-55.</p>

<p>Epsom, September; a few days. <i>Pr. and Med</i>. pp. 181, 225.</p>

<p>1780. Brighton. October. MS. letter dated Oct. 26, 1780 to Mr. Nichols
in the British Museum.</p>

<p>1781. Oxford, Birmingham, Lichfield, Ashbourn, from Oct. 15 to Dec. 11.
<i>Post</i>, iv. 135, and Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 699, note 5.</p>

<p>1782. Oxford, June; about ten days. <i>Post</i>, iv. 151, and <i>Piozzi
Letters</i>, ii. 243-249.</p>

<p>Brighton, part of October and November. <i>Post</i>, iv. 159.</p>

<p>1783. Rochester, July; about a fortnight. <i>Post</i>, iv. 233.</p>

<p>Heale near Salisbury, part of August and September; three weeks. <i>Post</i>,
iv. 233, 239.</p>

<p>1784. Oxford, June; a fortnight. <i>Post</i>, iv. 283, 311.</p>

<p>Lichfield, Ashbourn, Oxford, from July 13 to Nov. 16. <i>Post</i>, iv. 353,
377.</p>

<p>That he was always eager to see the world is shown by many a passage in
his writings and by the testimony of his biographers. How Macaulay, who
knew his <i>Boswell</i> so well, could have accused him of 'speaking of
foreign travel with the fierce and boisterous contempt of ignorance'
would be a puzzle indeed, did we not know how often this great
rhetorician was by the stream of his own mighty rhetoric swept far away
from the unadorned strand of naked truth. To his unjust and insulting
attack I shall content myself with opposing the following extracts which
with some trouble I have collected:—</p>

<p>1728 or 1729. Johnson in his undergraduate days was one day overheard
saying:—</p>

<p>'I have a mind to see what is done in other places of learning. I'll go
and visit the Universities abroad. I'll go to France and Italy. I'll go
to Padua.' <i>Ante</i>, i. 73.</p>

<p>1734. 'A generous and elevated mind is distinguished by nothing more
certainly than an eminent degree of curiosity, nor is that curiosity
ever more agreeably or usefully employed than in examining the laws and
customs of foreign nations.' <i>Ante</i>, i. 89.</p>

<p>1751. 'Curiosity is one of the permanent and certain characteristicks of
a vigorous intellect.' <i>Rambler</i>, No. 103. 'Curiosity is in great and
generous minds the first passion and the last; and perhaps always
predominates in proportion to the strength of the contemplative
faculties.' <i>Ib</i>. No. 150.</p>

<p>1752. Francis Barber, describing Johnson's friends in 1752, says:—</p>

<p>'There was a talk of his going to Iceland with Mr. Diamond, which would
probably have happened had he lived.' <i>Ante</i>, i. 242. Johnson, in a
letter to the wife of the poet Smart, says, 'we have often talked of a
voyage to Iceland.' <i>Post</i>, iv. 359 note. Mrs. Thrale wrote to him when
he was in the Hebrides in 1773:—'Well! 'tis better talk of Iceland.
Gregory challenges you for an Iceland expedition; but I trust there is
no need; I suppose good eyes might reach it from some of the places you
have been in.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 188.</p>

<p>1761. Johnson wrote to Baretti:—</p>

<p>'I wish you had staid longer in Spain, for no country is less known to
the rest of Europe.' <i>Ante</i>, i. 365. He twice recommended Boswell to
perambulate Spain. <i>Ante</i>, i. 410, 455.</p>

<p>1763. 'Dr. Johnson flattered me (Boswell) with some hopes that he would,
in the course of the following summer, come over to Holland, and
accompany me in a tour through the Netherlands.' <i>Ante</i>, i. 470.</p>

<p>1772. He said that he had had some desire, though he soon laid it aside,
to go on an expedition round the world with Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander.
<i>Ante</i>, ii. 147.</p>

<p>1773. 'Dr. Johnson and I talked of going to Sweden.' Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, <i>post</i>, v. 215.</p>

<p>On Sept. 9, 1777, Boswell wrote to Johnson:—</p>

<p>'I shrink a little from our scheme of going up the Baltick: I am sorry
you have already been in Wales; for I wish to see it.' <i>Ante</i>, iii. 134.
Four days later Johnson wrote to Mrs. Thrale:—'Boswell shrinks from the
Baltick expedition, which, I think, is the best scheme in our power:
what we shall substitute I know not. He wants to see Wales; but except
the woods of Bachycraigh (<i>post</i>, v. 436), what is there in Wales, that
can fill the hunger of ignorance, or quench the thirst of curiosity? We
may, perhaps, form some scheme or other; but in the phrase of <i>Hockley
in the Hole</i>, it is a pity he has not a <i>better bottom</i>.' <i>Ib</i>. note 1.</p>

<p>Boswell writes:—</p>

<p>'Martin's account of the Hebrides had impressed us with a notion that we
might there contemplate a system of life almost totally different from
what we had been accustomed to see…. Dr. Johnson told me that his
father put Martin's account into his hands when he was very young, and
that he was much pleased with it.' <i>Post</i>, v. 13.</p>

<p>From the Hebrides Johnson wrote to Mrs. Thrale:—</p>

<p>'I have a desire to instruct myself in the whole system of pastoral
life; but I know not whether I shall be able to perfect the idea.
However, I have many pictures in my mind, which I could not have had
without this journey; and should have passed it with great pleasure had
you, and Master, and Queeney been in the party. We should have excited
the attention and enlarged the observation of each other, and obtained
many pleasing topicks of future conversation.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 159.
'We travelled with very little light in a storm of wind and rain; we
passed about fifty-five streams that crossed our way, and fell into a
river that, for a very great part of our road, foamed and roared beside
us; all the rougher powers of nature except thunder were in motion, but
there was no danger. I should have been sorry to have missed any of the
inconveniencies, to have had more light or less rain, for their
co-operation crowded the scene and filled the mind.' <i>Ib</i>. p. 177.</p>

<p>See <i>post</i>, v. 334 for the splendid passage in which, describing the
emotions raised in his mind by the sight of Iona, he says:—</p>

<p>'Whatever withdraws us from the power of our senses, whatever makes the
past, the distant, or the future predominate over the present, advances
us in the dignity of thinking beings…. That man is little to be envied
whose patriotism would not gain force upon the plains of Marathon, or
whose piety would not grow warmer among the ruins of Iona.'</p>

<p>Macaulay seems to have had the echo of these lines still in his ear,
when he described imagination as 'that noble faculty whereby man is able
to live in the past and in the future, in the distant and in the
unreal.' <i>Essays</i>, ed. 1853, iii. 167.</p>

<p>1774. When he saw some copper and iron works in Wales he wrote:—</p>

<p>'I have enlarged my notions.' <i>Post</i>, v. 442. See also <i>ante</i>, iii. 164.</p>

<p>His letter to Warren Hastings shows his curiosity about India. <i>Ante,</i>
iv. 68.</p>

<p>1775. The Thrales had just received a sum of £14,000. Johnson wrote to
Mrs. Thrale:—</p>

<p>'If I had money enough, what would I do? Perhaps, if you and master did
not hold me, I might go to Cairo, and down the Red Sea to Bengal, and
take a ramble to India. Would this be better than building and planting?
It would surely give more variety to the eye, and more amplitude to the
mind. Half fourteen thousand would send me out to see other forms of
existence, and bring me back to describe them.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i.
266.</p>

<p>'Regions mountainous and wild, thinly inhabited and little cultivated,
make a great part of the earth, and he that has never seen them must
live unacquainted with much of the face of nature, and with one of the
great scenes of human existence.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, ix. 36. 'All travel
has its advantages. If the traveller visits better countries he may
learn to improve his own; and if fortune carries him to worse he may
learn to enjoy it.' <i>Ib</i>. p. 136.</p>

<p>To Dr. Taylor he wrote:—</p>

<p>'I came back last Tuesday from France. Is not mine a kind of life turned
upside down? Fixed to a spot when I was young, and roving the world when
others are contriving to sit still, I am wholly unsettled. I am a kind
of ship with a wide sail, and without an anchor.' <i>Ante</i>, ii. 387, note
2.</p>

<p>1776. In the spring of this year everything was settled for his journey
to Italy with the Thrales. Hannah More wrote (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 74):—</p>

<p>'Johnson and Mr. Boswell have this day set out for Oxford, Lichfield,
&amp;c., that the Doctor may take leave of all his old friends previous to
his great expedition across the Alps. I lament his undertaking such a
journey at his time of life, with beginning infirmities. I hope he will
not leave his bones on classic grounds.'</p>

<p>Boswell tells how—</p>

<p>'Speaking with a tone of animation Johnson said, "We must, to be sure,
see Rome, Naples, Florence, and Venice, and as much more as we can."'
<i>Ante</i>, iii. 19.</p>

<p>When the journey was put off by the sudden death of Mr. Thrale's son,<br/>

Boswell wrote:—<br/>
</p>

<p>'I perceived that he had so warmly cherished the hope of enjoying
classical scenes, that he could not easily part with the scheme; for he
said, "I shall probably contrive to get to Italy some other way."' <i>Ib</i>.
p. 28.</p>

<p>A day later Boswell wrote:—</p>

<p>'A journey to Italy was still in his thoughts. He said, "A man who has
not been in Italy is always conscious of an inferiority, from his not
having seen what it is expected a man should see. The grand object of
travelling is to see the shores of the Mediterranean."' <i>Ib</i>. p. 36.
'Johnson's desire to go abroad, particularly to see Italy, was very
great; and he had a longing wish, too, to leave some Latin verses at the
Grand Chartreux. He loved indeed the very act of travelling…. He was
in some respects an admirable companion on the road, as he piqued
himself upon feeling no inconvenience, and on despising no
accommodations.' Piozzi's <i>Anec</i>. p. 168.</p>

<p>Johnson, this same year, speaking of a friend who had gone to the East<br/>

Indies, said:—<br/>
</p>

<p>'I had some intention of accompanying him. Had I thought then as I do
now, I should have gone.' <i>Ante</i>, iii. 20. According to Mr. Tyers he
once offered to attend another friend to India. Moreover 'he talked much
of travelling into Poland to observe the life of the Palatines, the
account of which struck his curiosity very much.' <i>Johnsoniana</i>, ed.
1836, p. 157.</p>

<p>1777. Boswell wrote to Johnson this year (<i>ante</i>, iii. 107):—</p>

<p>'You have, I believe, seen all the cathedrals in England except that of<br/>

Carlisle.'<br/>
</p>

<p>This was not the case, yet most of them he had already seen or lived to
see. With Lichfield, Oxford, and London he was familiar. Winchester and
Exeter he had seen in 1762 on his tour to Devonshire (<i>ante</i>, i. 377),
Peterborough, Ely, Lincoln, York, and Durham he no doubt saw in 1773 on
his way to Scotland. The first three he might also have seen in 1764 on
his visit to Langton (<i>ante</i>, i. 476). Chester, St. Asaph, Bangor, and
Worcester he visited in 1774 in his journey to Wales (<i>post</i>, v. 435,
436, 448, 456). Through Canterbury he almost certainly passed in 1775 on
his way to France (<i>ante</i>, ii. 384). Bristol he saw in 1776 (<i>ante</i>,
iii. 51). To Chichester he drove from Brighton in 1782 (<i>post</i>, iv.
160). Rochester and Salisbury he visited in the summer of 1783 (<i>post</i>,
iv. 233). Wells he might easily have seen when he was at Bath in 1776
(<i>ante</i>, iii. 44), and possibly Gloucester. Through Norwich he perhaps
came on his return from Lincolnshire in 1764 (<i>ante</i>, i. 476). Hereford,
I think, he could not have visited.</p>

<p>When in the September of this year Johnson and Boswell were driving in
Dr. Taylor's chaise to Derby, 'Johnson strongly expressed his love of
driving fast in a post-chaise. "If," said he, "I had no duties, and no
reference to futurity, I would spend my life in driving briskly in a
post-chaise with a pretty woman; but she should be one who could
understand me, and would add something to the conversation"' (<i>ante</i>,
iii. 162). He had previously said (<i>ante</i>, ii. 453), as he was driven
rapidly along in a post-chaise, 'Life has not many things better than
this.'</p>

<p>1778. Boswell wrote to Johnson:—</p>

<p>'My wife is so different from you and me that she dislikes travelling.'
<i>Ante</i>, iii. 219.</p>

<p>Later on in the year Boswell records:—</p>

<p>'Dr. Johnson expressed a particular enthusiasm with respect to visiting
the wall of China. I catched it for the moment, and said I really
believed I should go and see the wall of China had I not children, of
whom it was my duty to take care. "Sir, (said he,) by doing so you would
do what would be of importance in raising your children to eminence.
There would be a lustre reflected upon them from your spirit and
curiosity. They would be at all times regarded as the children of a man
who had gone to view the wall of China. I am serious, Sir."' <i>Ante</i>,
iii. 269.</p>

<p>1780. In August he wrote to Boswell:—</p>

<p>'I know not whether I shall get a ramble this summer…. I hope you and
I may yet shew ourselves on some part of Europe, Asia, or Africa.'
<i>Ante</i>, iii. 435.</p>

<p>In the same year Johnson wrote to Mrs. Thrale:—</p>

<p>'I hope you have no design of stealing away to Italy before the
election, nor of leaving me behind you; though I am not only seventy,
but seventy-one.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 177.</p>

<p>On Oct. 17 he wrote:—</p>

<p>'The summer has been foolishly lost, like many other of my summers and
winters. I hardly saw a green field, but staid in town to work, without
working much.' <i>Ante</i>, iii. 441.</p>

<p>1784. Johnson's wish to go to Italy in the last year of his life was
caused by the hope that it might be good for his health. 'I do not,' he
wrote, 'travel for pleasure or curiosity; yet if I should recover,' he
added, 'curiosity would revive.' <i>Post</i>, iv. 348.</p>

<p>Mrs. Piozzi, without however giving the year, records:—</p>

<p>'Dr. Johnson was very angry with a gentleman at our house for not being
better company, and urged that he had travelled into Bohemia and seen
Prague. "Surely," added he, "the man who has seen Prague might tell us
something new and something strange, and not sit silent for want of
matter to put his lips in motion."' Piozzi's <i>Journey</i>, ii. 317.</p>

<p>All these passages shew, what indeed is evident enough from the text,
that it was not travelling in general but travelling between the ages of
nineteen and twenty-four, with a character unformed, a memory unstored,
and a judgment untrained, that Johnson attacked. It was a common habit
in his day to send young men of fortune to make the tour of Europe, as
it was called, at an age when they would now be sent to either Oxford or
Cambridge. Lord Charlemont was but eighteen when he left England. Locke,
at the end of his work on <i>Education</i>, said in 1692 much the same as
Johnson said in 1778.</p>

<p>'The ordinary time of travel,' he wrote, 'is from sixteen to one and
twenty.' He would send any one either at a younger age than sixteen
under a tutor, or at an older age than twenty-one without a tutor; 'when
he is of age to govern himself, and make observations of what he finds
in other countries worthy his notice … and when, too, being thoroughly
acquainted with the laws and fashions, the natural and moral advantages
and defects of his own country, he has something to exchange with those
abroad, from whose conversation he hoped to reap any knowledge.'</p>

<p>Goldsmith, in his <i>Present State of Polite Learning</i>, ch. xiii, wrote in
1759:—</p>

<p>'We see more of the world by travel, but more of human nature by
remaining at home…. A youth just landed at the Brille resembles a
clown at a puppet-show; carries his amazement from one miracle to
another; from this cabinet of curiosities to that collection of
pictures; but wondering is not the way to grow wise…. The greatest
advantages which result to youth from travel are an easy address, the
shaking off national prejudices, and the finding nothing ridiculous in
national peculiarities. The time spent in these acquisitions could have
been more usefully employed at home.' Gibbon (<i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 197)
says that 'the previous and indispensable requisites of foreign travel
are age, judgment, a competent knowledge of men and books, and a freedom
from domestic prejudices.'</p>

<p>When he was only eighteen years old he saw the evils of early
travelling:—</p>

<p>'I never liked young travellers; they go too raw to make any great
remarks, and they lose a time which is (in my opinion) the most precious
part of a man's life.' <i>Ib</i>. p. 98.</p>

<p>Cowper, in his <i>Progress of Error</i> (ed. 1782, i. 60), describes how—</p>

<p>'His stock, a few French phrases got by heart,<br/>

With much to learn and nothing to impart,<br/>

The youth obedient to his sire's commands,<br/>

Sets off a wanderer into foreign lands.<br/>
</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<p>Returning he proclaims by many a grace,<br/>

By shrugs and strange contortions of his face,<br/>

How much a dunce that has been sent to roam<br/>

Excels a dunce that has been kept at home.'<br/>
</p>

<h2>APPENDIX C.</h2>

<h5>ELECTION OF LORD MAYORS OF LONDON.</h5>

<p>(<i>Page</i> 356.)</p>

<p>In the years 1751-2-3, the Lord Mayor was not appointed by rotation; Sir
G. Champion, the senior Alderman, being accused of a leaning towards
Spain. From 1754 to 1765 (inclusive) if there was in any year a contest,
yet in each case the senior Alderman nominated was chosen. From 1766 to
1775 (inclusive) there was in every year a departure from the order of
seniority. In 1776-8 the order of seniority was again observed; so that
two years before Johnson made his remark the irregularity had come to an
end. This information I owe to the kindness of Mr. Scott, the excellent
Chamberlain of the City. Sir George Champion had been passed over in the
year 1739 also. In an address to the Liverymen he says that 'the
disorders and great disturbance to the peace of the city, which in
former times had been occasioned by the over-eagerness of some, too
ambitious and impatient to obtain this great honour, had been quieted'
by the adoption of the order of seniority. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. 1739, p. 595.
Among the Lord Mayors from 1769-1775 (inclusive) we find Beckford,
Trecothick, Crosby, Townshend, Bull, Wilkes, and Sawbridge. 'Where did
Beckford and Trecothick learn English?' asked Johnson (<i>ante</i>, iii. 76).
Crosby, in the year of his mayoralty (1770-1), was committed to the
Tower by the House of Commons, for having himself committed to prison a
messenger of the House when attempting to arrest the printer of the
<i>London Evening Debates</i>, who was accused of a breach of privilege in
reporting the Debates (<i>Parl. Hist</i>. xvii. 155). Townshend in the same
year refused to pay the land-tax, on the plea that his county
(Middlesex) was no longer represented, as Wilkes's election had been
annulled (<i>Walpole's Letters</i>, v. 348). Bull in the House of Commons
violently attacked Lord North's ministry (<i>Parl. Hist</i>. xix. 980).
Sawbridge, year after year, brought into Parliament a bill for
shortening the duration of parliaments. During his Mayoralty he would
not suffer the pressgangs to enter the city. (Walpole's <i>Journal of the
Reign of George III</i>, ii. 84.)</p>

<p>Among the Aldermen the Court-party had a majority. In April 1769
Wilkes's eligibility for election as an Alderman was not allowed by a
majority of ten to six (Walpole's <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George III</i>,
iii. 360, and <i>Ann. Reg</i>. xii. 92). On his release from prison in April
1770 he was, however, admitted without a division (<i>ib</i>. xiii. 99).
When, in March 1770, the City presented an outspoken remonstrance to the
King, sixteen Aldermen protested against it (Walpole's <i>Letters</i>, v.
229). About this time there arose a great division in the popular party
in the City. According to Lord Albemarle, in his <i>Memoirs of
Rockingham</i>, ii. 209, from the period of this struggle 'the Whigs and
what are now called Radicals became two distinct sections of the Liberal
party.' Townshend, who in this followed the lead of Lord Shelburne,
headed the more moderate men against Wilkes. The result was that in 1771
each section running a candidate for the Mayoralty, a third man, Nash,
who was opposed to both, was returned (Walpole's <i>Memoirs of the Reign
of George III</i>, iv. 345, and <i>Ann. Reg</i>. xiv. 146).</p>

<p>The Livery, for a time at least, was Wilkite. Wilkes's name was sent up
as Lord Mayor at the top of the list in 1772 and 1773, but he was in
each case passed over by the Court of Aldermen. It was not till 1774
that he was elected by a kind of 'Hobson's choice.' The Aldermen had to
choose between him and the retiring Lord Mayor, Bull. Walpole, writing
of Nov. 1776, says the new Lord Mayor 'invited the Ministers to his
feast, to which they had not been asked for seven years' (<i>Journal of
the Reign of George III</i>, ii. 84). See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, <i>post</i>, v.
339.</p>

<h2>APPENDIX D.</h2>

<p>THE INMATES OF JOHNSON'S HOUSE.<br/>

(Page 368.)<br/>
</p>

<p>In September of this year (1778) Miss Burney records the following
conversation at Streatham:—'MRS. THRALE. "Pray, Sir, how does Mrs.
Williams like all this tribe?" DR. J. "Madam, she does not like them at
all; but their fondness for her is not greater. She and Desmoulins
quarrel incessantly; but as they can both be occasionally of service to
each other, and as neither of them have any other place to go to, their
animosity does not force them to separate." … MR. T. "And pray who is
clerk of your kitchen, Sir?" DR. J. "Why, Sir, I am afraid there is
none; a general anarchy prevails in my kitchen, as I am told by Mr.
Levett, who says it is not now what it used to be." MRS. T. "Mr. Levett,
I suppose, Sir, has the office of keeping the hospital in health, for he
is an apothecary." DR. J. "Levett, Madam, is a brutal fellow, but I have
a good regard for him; for his brutality is in his manners, not his
mind." MR. T. "But how do you get your dinners drest?" DR. J. "Why,
Desmoulins has the chief management of the kitchen; but our roasting is
not magnificent, for we have no jack." MR. T. "No jack! Why, how do they
manage without?" DR. J. "Small joints, I believe, they manage with a
string, and larger are done at the tavern. I have some thoughts (with a
profound gravity) of buying a jack, because I think a jack is some
credit to a house." MR. T. "Well, but you'll have a spit too." DR. J.
"No, Sir, no; that would be superfluous; for we shall never use it; and
if a jack is seen, a spit will be presumed." MRS. T. "But pray, Sir, who
is the Poll you talk of? She that you used to abet in her quarrels with
Mrs. Williams, and call out, <i>At her again, Poll! Never flinch, Poll!</i>"
DR. J. "Why, I took to Poll very well at first, but she won't do upon a
nearer examination." MRS. T. "How came she among you, Sir?" DR. J. "Why,
I don't rightly remember, but we could spare her very well from us. Poll
is a stupid slut. I had some hopes of her at first; but when I talked to
her tightly and closely, I could make nothing of her; she was wiggle
waggle, and I could never persuade her to be categorical."' Mme.
D'Arblay's <i>Diary,</i> i. 114.</p>

<p>More than a year later Johnson wrote to Mrs. Thrale:—'Discord keeps her
residence in this habitation, but she has for some time been silent. We
have much malice, but no mischief. Levett is rather a friend to
Williams, because he hates Desmoulins more. A thing that he should hate
more than Desmoulins is not to be found.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 80. Mrs.
Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 213) says:—'He really was oftentimes afraid of going
home, because he was so sure to be met at the door with numberless
complaints; and he used to lament pathetically to me that they made his
life miserable from the impossibility he found of making theirs happy,
when every favour he bestowed on one was wormwood to the rest. If,
however, I ventured to blame their ingratitude, and condemn their
conduct, he would instantly set about softening the one and justifying
the other; and finished commonly by telling me, that I knew not how to
make allowances for situations I never experienced.' Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p.
404) says:—'Almost throughout Johnson's life poverty and distressed
circumstances seemed to be the strongest of all recommendations to his
favour. When asked by one of his most intimate friends, how he could
bear to be surrounded by such necessitous and undeserving people as he
had about him, his answer was, "If I did not assist them, no one else
would, and they must be lost for want."' 'His humanity and generosity,
in proportion to his slender income, were,' writes Murphy (<i>Life</i>, p.
146), 'unbounded. It has been truly said that the lame, the blind, and
the sorrowful found in his house a sure retreat.' See also <i>ante</i>, iii.
222. At the same time it must be remembered that while Mrs. Desmoulins
and Miss Carmichael only brought trouble into the house, in the society
of Mrs. Williams and Levett he had real pleasure. See <i>ante</i>, i. 232,
note 1, and 243, note 3.</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<h2>APPENDIX E.</h2>

<h5>BOSWELL'S LETTERS OF ACCEPTANCE OF THE OFFICE OF SECRETARY FOR FOREIGN
CORRESPONDENCE TO THE ROYAL ACADEMY.</h5>

<p>(<i>Page 370, note i</i>.)</p>

<h4>LETTER I.</h4>

<p>'Agli Illustrissimi Signori Il Presidente e Consiglieri dell' Academia<br/>

Reale delle arti in Londra.<br/>
</p>

<p>'Avreste forse illustrissimi Signori potuto scegliere molte persone piu
degne dell' ufficcio di Segretario per la corrispondenza straniera; ma
non sarebbe, son certo, stato possibile di trovar alcuno dal quale
questa distinzione sarebbe stata piu stimata. Sento con un animo molto
riconoscente la parzialitá che l'Academia a ben voluto mostrar per me; e
mi conto felicissimo che la mia elezione sia stata graziosamente
confirmata dalla sua Maestá lo stesso Sovrano che a fondato l'Academia,
e che si é sempre mostrato il suo beneficente Protettore.</p>

<p>'Vi prego, Signori, di credere que porro ogni mio studio a contribuire
tanto che potro alia prosperita della nostra instituzione ch' é gia
arrivata ad un punto si rispettevole.</p>

<p>'Ho l'onore d'essere,
'Illustrissimi Signori,
'Vostro umilissimo,
'e divotissimo servo,
'Giacomo Boswell.'
'Londra,
'31 d'Ottobre, 1791.'</p>

<h5>LETTER. II.</h5>

<p>'A Messieurs Le President et les autres Membres du Conseil de l'Academie<br/>

Royale des Arts à Londres.<br/>
</p>

<p>'Messieurs,</p>

<p>'C'est avec la plus vive reconnoissance que J'accepte la charge de<br/>

Secretaire pour la Correspondence etrangêre de votre Academie á laquelle<br/>

J'ai eu l'honneur d'etre choisi par vos suffrages unanimes gracieusement<br/>

confirmés par sa Majesté.<br/>
</p>

<p>'Ce choix spontané Messieurs me flatte beaucoup; et m'inspire des desirs
les plus ardens de m'en montrer digne, au moins par la promptitude avec
laquelle Je saisirai toute occasion de faire ce que Je pourrai pour
contribuer á l'avantage des Arts et la celebrité de l'Academie.</p>

<p>'J'ai l'honneur d'etre avec toute la consideration possible,</p>

<p>'Messieurs,</p>

<p>'Votre serviteur tres obligé tres humble et tres fidel,<br/>

'Boswell.'<br/>

'A Londres,<br/>

'ce 31 d'Octobre, 1791'<br/>
</p>

<p>[In this letter I have made no attempt to correct Boswell's errors.]</p>

<h5>LETTER III.</h5>

<p>'To the President and Council of The Royal Academy of Arts in London.</p>

<p>'Gentlemen,</p>

<p>'Your unsolicited and unanimous election of me to be Secretary for
Foreign Correspondence to your Academy, and the gracious confirmation of
my election by his Majesty, I acknowledge with the warmest sentiments of
gratitude and respect.</p>

<p>'I have always loved the Arts, and during my travels on the Continent I
did not neglect the opportunities which I had of cultivating a taste for
them.[1372] That taste I trust will now be much improved, when I shall
be so happy as to share in the advantages which the Royal Academy
affords; and I fondly embrace this very pleasing distinction as giving
me the means of providing additional solace for the future years of my
life.</p>

<p>'Be assured, Gentlemen, that as I am proud to be a member of an Academy
which has the peculiar felicity of not being at all dependant on a
Minister[1373], but under the immediate patronage and superintendence of
the Sovereign himself, I shall be zealous to do every thing in my power
that can be of any service to our excellent Institution.</p>

<p>'I have the honour to be,</p>

<p>'Gentlemen,</p>

<p>'Your much obliged</p>

<p>'And faithful humble servant,</p>

<h5>'JAMES BOSWELL.'</h5>

<p>'London,</p>

<p>'31 October, 1791.'</p>

<h4>LETTER IV.</h4>

<h5>'SIR,</h5>

<p>'I am much obliged to you for the very polite terms in which you have
been pleased to communicate to me my election to be Secretary for
Foreign Correspondence to the Royal Academy of Arts in London; and I
request that you will lay before the President and Council the enclosed
letters signifying my acceptance of that office.</p>

<p>'I am with great regard,</p>

<p>'Sir,</p>

<p>'Your most obedient humble servant,</p>

<h5>'JAMES BOSWELL.'</h5>

<p>'London,</p>

<p>'31 October, 1791.</p>

<p>'To John Richards, Esq., R.A. &amp;c.'</p>

<p>Bennet Langton's letter of acceptance of the Professorship of Ancient<br/>

Literature in the place of Johnson is dated April 2, 1788.<br/>
</p>

<p>I must express my acknowledgments to the President and Council of the
Royal Academy for their kindness in allowing me to copy the above
letters from the originals that are in their possession.</p>


</body>
</html>
