<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>A Chronological Catalogue of the Prose Works of Samuel Johnson, LL.D.</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="bibliography" epub:type="bibliography">
			<h2 epub:type="title">A Chronological Catalogue of the Prose Works<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-81" id="noteref-81" epub:type="noteref">81</a> of Samuel Johnson, <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:name-title">LL.D.</abbr></h2>
			<p id="I-page-16">[<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">N.B.</abbr> To those which he himself acknowledged is added <i>acknowledged</i>. To those which may be fully believed to be his from internal evidence, is added <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i>]</p>
			<hr/>
			<p class="year-header">1735</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Abridgement and translation of Lobo’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage to Abyssinia</i>, <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1738</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Part of a translation of Father Paul Sarpi’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Council of Trent</i>. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>[<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">N.B.</abbr> As this work after some sheets were printed, suddenly stopped, I know not whether any part of it is now to be found.]</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p class="note-header">For the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Preface. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Life of Father Paul. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1739</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>A complete vindication of the Licenser of the Stage from the malicious and scandalous aspersions of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brooke, author of Gustavus Vasa. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p id="I-page-17"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="la">Marmor Norfolciense</i>: or, an Essay on an ancient prophetical inscription in monkish rhyme, lately discovered near Lynne in Norfolk; by <b>Probus Britannicus</b>. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				</ul>
				<p class="note-header">For the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i></p>
				<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Life of Boerhaave. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Address to the Reader. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Appeal to the Public in behalf of the Editor. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Considerations on the case of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Trapp’s Sermons; a plausible attempt to prove that an author’s work may be abridged without injuring his property. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1740</p>
			<p class="note-header">For the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i></p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Preface. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Life of Admiral Drake. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Life of Admiral Blake. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Life of Philip Barretier. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Essay on Epitaphs. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1741</p>
			<p class="note-header">For the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i></p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Preface. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>A free translation of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Jests of Hierocles</i>, with an introduction. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Debate on the “Humble Petition and Advice” of the Rump Parliament to Cromwell in 1657, to assume the Title of King; abridged, methodized and digested. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Translation of Abbé Guyon’s Dissertation on the Amazons. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Translation of Fontenelle’s Panegyric on <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Morin. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1742</p>
			<p class="note-header">For the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i></p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Preface. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Essay on the Account of the Conduct of the Duchess of Marlborough. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>An Account of the Life of Peter Burman. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Life of Sydenham, afterwards prefixed to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Swan’s Edition of his Works. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Proposals for printing Bibliotheca Harleiana, or a Catalogue of the Library of the Earl of Oxford, afterwards prefixed to the first Volume of that Catalogue, in which the Latin Accounts of the Books were written by him. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Abridgement intitled, Foreign History. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Essay on the Description of China, from the French of Du Halde. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header" id="I-page-18">1743</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Dedication to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Mead of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> James’s Medicinal Dictionary. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="note-header">For the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i></p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Preface, <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Parliamentary Debates under the Name of Debates in the Senate of Lilliput, from <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 19, 1740, to <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 23, 1742-3, inclusive. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Considerations on the Dispute between Crousaz and Warburton on Pope’s Essay on Man. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>A Letter announcing that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Savage</i> was speedily to be published by a person who was favoured with his Confidence. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Advertisement for Osborne concerning the Harleian Catalogue. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1744</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Life of Richard Savage. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Preface to the Harleian Miscellany. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="note-header">For the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i></p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Preface. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1745</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Miscellaneous Observations on the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Tragedy of Macbeth</i>, with remarks on Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:personal-name">T. H.</abbr>’s (Sir Thomas Hanmer’s) Edition of Shakespeare, and proposals for a new Edition of that Poet. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1747</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Plan for a Dictionary of the <b>English Language</b>, addressed to Philip Dormer, Earl of Chesterfield. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1748</p>
			<p class="note-header">For the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i></p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Life of Roscommon. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Foreign History, November. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="note-header">For Dodsley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Preceptor</i>.</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Preface. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Vision of Theodore the Hermit. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1750</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Rambler</i>, the first Paper of which was published 20th of March this year, and the last 17th of March 1752, the day on which <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Johnson died. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Letter in the General Advertiser to excite the attention of the Public to the Performance of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Comus</i>, which was next day to be acted at Drury-Lane Playhouse for the Benefit of Milton’s Grandaughter. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Preface and Postscript to Lauder’s Pamphlet intitled, “An Essay on Milton’s Use and Imitation of the Moderns in his Paradise Lost.” <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p id="I-page-19">1751.</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Life of Cheynel in the Miscellany called “The Student.” <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Letter for Lauder, addressed To the Reverend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> John Douglas, acknowledging his Fraud concerning Milton in Terms of suitable Contrition. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Dedication to the Earl of Middlesex of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Charlotte Lennox’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Female Quixotte</i>. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-82" id="noteref-82" epub:type="noteref">82</a></p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1753</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Dedication to John Earl of Orrery, of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Shakespeare Illustrated</i>, by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Charlotte Lennox. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>During this and the following year he wrote and gave to his much loved friend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Bathurst the Papers in the Adventurer, signed <abbr>T.</abbr> <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1754</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Life of Edw. Cave in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i>. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1755</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>A <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i>, with a Grammar and History, of the <b>English Language</b>. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>An Account of an Attempt to ascertain the Longitude at Sea, by an exact Theory of the Variations of the Magnetical Needle, with a Table of the Variations at the most remarkable Cities in Europe from the year 1660 to 1860. <i>acknowledged</i>. This he wrote for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Zachariah Williams, an ingenious ancient Welch Gentleman, father of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Anna Williams whom he for many years kindly lodged in his House. It was published with a Translation into Italian by Signor Baretti. In a Copy of it which he presented to the Bodleian Library at Oxford, is pasted a Character of the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Zachariah Williams, plainly written by Johnson. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1756</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>An Abridgement of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i>. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Several Essays in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Universal Visitor</i>, which there is some difficulty in ascertaining. All that are marked with two Asterisks have been ascribed to him, although I am confident from internal Evidence, that we should except from these “The Life of Chaucer,” “Reflections on the State of Portugal,” and “An Essay on Architecture.” And from the same Evidence I am confident that he wrote “Further Thoughts on Agriculture,” and “A Dissertation on the State of Literature and Authors.” The Dissertation on the Epitaphs written by Pope he afterwards acknowledged, and added to his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Idler</i>.”</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Life of Sir Thomas Browne prefixed to a new Edition of his Christian Morals. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="note-header" id="I-page-20">In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Literary Review</i>; or, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Universal Review</i>, which began in January 1756.</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>His <em>Original Essays</em> are</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Preliminary Address, <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>An introduction to the Political State of Great Britain, <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Remarks on the Militia Bill, <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Observations on his Britannic Majesty’s Treaties with the Empress of Russia and the Landgrave of Hesse Cassel. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Observations on the Present State of Affairs. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Memoirs of Frederick <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> King of Prussia. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="note-header">In the same Magazine his Reviews are of the following Books:</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Birch’s History of the Royal Society.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Browne’s Christian Morals.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Warton’s Essay on the Writings and Genius of Pope, Volume I.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hampton’s Translation of Polybius.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sir Isaac Newton’s Arguments in Proof of a Deity.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Borlase’s History of the Isles of Scilly.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Home’s Experiments on Bleaching.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Browne’s History of Jamaica.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hales on Distilling Sea Waters, Ventilators in Ships, and curing an ill Taste in Milk.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lucas’s Essay on Waters.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Keith’s Catalogue of the Scottish Bishops.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Philosophical Transactions, Volume XLIX.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Miscellanies by Elizabeth Harrison.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Evans’s Map and Account of the Middle Colonies in America.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Cadet, a Military Treatise.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Conduct of the Ministry relating to the present War impartially examined.</i> <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lennox’s Translation of Sully’s Memoirs.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Letter on the Case of Admiral Byng.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Appeal to the People concerning Admiral Byng.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hanway’s Eight Days’ Journey, and Essay on Tea.</i>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Some further Particulars in Relation to the Case of Admiral Byng, by a Gentleman of Oxford.</i> <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jonas Hanway having written an angry Answer to the Review of his Essay on Tea, Johnson in the same Collection made a Reply to it. <i>acknowledged</i>. This is the only Instance, it is believed, when he condescended to take Notice of any Thing that had been written against him; and here his chief Intention seems to have been to make Sport.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Dedication to the Earl of Rochford of, and Preface to, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Payne’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Introduction to the Game of Draughts</i>, <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p id="I-page-21">Introduction to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">London Chronicle</i>, an Evening Paper which still subsists with deserved credit. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1757</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Speech on the Subject of an Address to the Throne after the Expedition to Rochefort; delivered by one of his Friends in some public Meeting: it is printed in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i> for October 1785. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The first two Paragraphs of the Preface to Sir William Chambers’s Designs of Chinese Buildings, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1758</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Idler</i>, which began April 5, in this year, and was continued till April 5, 1760. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>An Essay on the Bravery of the English Common Soldiers was added to it when published in Volumes. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1759</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rasselas Prince of Abyssinia, a Tale</i>. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Advertisement for the Proprietors of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Idler</i> against certain Persons who pirated those Papers as they came out singly in a Newspaper called the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Universal Chronicle</i> or <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Weekly Gazette</i>. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>For <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Charlotte Lennox’s English Version of Brumoy,—“A Dissertation on the Greek Comedy,” and the General Conclusion of the Book. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Introduction to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">World Displayed, a Collection of Voyages and Travels</i>. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Three Letters in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Gazetteer</i>, concerning the best plan for Blackfriars Bridge. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1760</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Address of the Painters to George <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> on his Accession to the Throne. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Dedication of Baretti’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Italian and English Dictionary</i> to the Marquis of Abreu, then Envoy-Extraordinary from Spain at the Court of Great-Britain. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Review in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i> of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tytler’s acute and able Vindication of Mary Queen of Scots. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Introduction to the Proceedings of the Committee for Clothing the French Prisoners. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1761</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Preface to Rolfs <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary of Trade and Commerce</i>. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Corrections and Improvements for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gwyn the Architect’s Pamphlet, intitled “Thoughts on the Coronation of George <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>” <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p class="year-header">1762</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Dedication to the King of the Reverend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Kennedy’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Complete System of Astronomical Chronology, unfolding the Scriptures</i>, Quarto Edition. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Concluding Paragraph of that Work. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Preface to the Catalogue of the Artists’ Exhibition. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1763</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p id="I-page-22">Character of Collins in the Poetical Calendar, published by Fawkes and Woty. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Dedication to the Earl of Shaftesbury of the Edition of Roger Ascham’s English Works, published by the Reverend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bennet. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Life of Ascham, also prefixed to that edition. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Review of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Telemachus, a Masque</i>, by the Reverend George Graham of Eton College, in the Critical Review. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Dedication to the Queen of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hoole’s Translation of Tasso. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Account of the Detection of the Imposture of the Cock-Lane Ghost, published in the Newspapers and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i>. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1764</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Part of a Review of Grainger’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Sugar Cane, a Poem</i>, in the London Chronicle. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Review of Goldsmith’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Traveller, a Poem</i>, in the Critical Review. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1765</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Plays of William Shakespeare</i>, in eight volumes, <abbr>8vo.</abbr> with Notes. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1766</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>The Fountains, a Fairy Tale, in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams’s Miscellanies. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1767</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Dedication to the King of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Adams’s Treatise on the Globes. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1769</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Character of the Reverend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Zachariah Mudge, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">London Chronicle</i>. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1770</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">The False Alarm</i>. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1771</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Thoughts on the late Transactions respecting Falkland’s Islands. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1772</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Defence of a Schoolmaster; dictated to me for the House of Lords. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Argument in Support of the Law of <em>Vicious Intromission</em>; dictated to me for the Court of Session in Scotland. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1773</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Preface to Macbean’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary of Ancient Geography</i>. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Argument in Favour of the Rights of Lay Patrons; dictated to me for the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1774</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">The Patriot</i>. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1775</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland</i>. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Proposals for publishing the Works of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Charlotte Lennox, in Three Volumes Quarto. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Preface to Baretti’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Easy Lessons in Italian and English</i>. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p id="I-page-23"><i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Taxation no Tyranny; an Answer to the Resolutions and Address of the American Congress</i>. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Argument on the Case of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Memis; dictated to me for the Court of Session in Scotland. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Argument to prove that the Corporation of Stirling was corrupt; dictated to me for the House of Lords. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1776</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Argument in Support of the Right of immediate, and personal reprehension from the Pulpit; dictated to me. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Proposals for publishing an Analysis of the Scotch Celtic Language, by the Reverend William Shaw. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1777</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Dedication to the King of the Posthumous Works of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Pearce, Bishop of Rochester. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Additions to the Life and Character of that Prelate; prefixed to those Works. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Various Papers and Letters in Favour of the Reverend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1780</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Advertisement for his Friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale to the Worthy Electors of the Borough of Southwark. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The first Paragraph of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas Davies’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Garrick</i>, <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1781</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Prefaces Biographical and Critical to the Works of the most eminent English Poets; afterwards published with the Title of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives of the English Poets</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-83" id="noteref-83" epub:type="noteref">83</a> <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Argument on the Importance of the Registration of Deeds; dictated to me for an Election Committee of the House of Commons. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>On the Distinction between <b>Tory</b> and <b>Whig</b>; dictated to me. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>On Vicarious Punishments, and the great Propitiation for the Sins of the World, by <b>Jesus Christ</b>; dictated to me. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Argument in favour of Joseph Knight, an African Negro, who claimed his Liberty in the Court of Session in Scotland, and obtained it; dictated to me. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Defence of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Robertson, Printer of the Caledonian Mercury, against the Society of Procurators in Edinburgh, for having inserted in his Paper a ludicrous Paragraph against them; demonstrating that it was not an injurious Libel; dictated to me. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p id="I-page-24">1782.</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>The greatest part, if not the whole, of a Reply, by the Reverend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shaw, to a Person at Edinburgh, of the Name of Clark, refuting his arguments for the authenticity of the Poems published by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> James Macpherson as Translations from Ossian. <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header">1784</p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>List of the Authors of the Universal History, deposited in the British Museum, and printed in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i> for December, this year, <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p class="year-header"><i>Various Years</i></p>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>Letters to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale. <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prayers and Meditations</i>, which he delivered to the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan, enjoining him to publish them, <i>acknowledged</i>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Sermons <em>left for Publication</em> by John Taylor, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">LL.D.</abbr> Prebendary of Westminster, and given to the World by the Reverend Samuel Hayes, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">A.M.</abbr> <i><abbr>intern.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">evid.</abbr></i></p>
				</li>
			</ul>
			<p>Such was the number and variety of the Prose Works of this extraordinary man, which I have been able to discover, and am at liberty to mention; but we ought to keep in mind, that there must undoubtedly have been many more which are yet concealed; and we may add to the account, the numerous Letters which he wrote, of which a considerable part are yet unpublished. It is hoped that those persons in whose possession they are, will favour the world with them.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">James Boswell.</p>
			</footer>
			<hr/>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
				<span>“After my death I wish no other herald,</span>
<br/>
				<span>No other speaker of my living actions,</span>
<br/>
				<span>To keep mine honour from corruption,</span>
<br/>
				<span>But such an honest chronicler as Griffith.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-84" id="noteref-84" epub:type="noteref">84</a></span>
				</p>
				<cite>—Shakespeare, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span></i> [Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> Sc. 2.]</cite>
			</blockquote>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
