<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Life of Johnson, Volume 6
Addenda, index, dicta philosophi, etc., by James Boswell and George Birkbeck Norman Hill</title>

</head>
<body>

<h5>VOLUME VI: ADDENDA, INDEX, DICTA PHILOSOPHI, &amp;C.</h5>

<h5>EDITED BY GEORGE BIRKBECK HILL, D.C.L.</h5>

<h5>PEMBROKE COLLEGE, OXFORD</h5>

<h5>M DCCC LXXXVII</h5>

<h1>CONTENTS</h1>

<h4>TITLES OF WORKS QUOTED IN THE NOTES</h4>

<h5>ADDENDA (AUTOGRAPH LETTERS, ETC.)</h5>

<h5>INDEX</h5>

<h5>DICTA PHILOSOPH</h5>

<h2>TITLES OF MANY OF THE WORKS
QUOTED IN THE NOTES.</h2>

<p>In my notes I have often given but brief references to the authors whom
I quote. The following list, which is not, however, so complete as I
could wish, will, I hope, do much towards supplying the deficiency.
Most of the poets, and a few of the prose writers also, I have not
found it needful to include, as my references apply equally well to
all editions of their works. The date in each case shows, not the
year of the original publication, but of the edition to which I have
referred.</p>

<p>ADDISON, Joseph, <i>Works</i>, 6 vols., London, 1862.</p>

<p>AIKIN, J. and A. L., <i>Miscellaneous Pieces in Prose</i>, 1773.</p>

<p>ALBEMARLE, Earl of, <i>Memoirs of the Marquis of Rockingham,</i> 2 vols.,<br/>

London, 1852.<br/>
</p>

<p>ALMON, John, <i>Correspondence, etc. of John Wilkes</i>, 5 vols.,<br/>

London, 1805.<br/>
</p>

<p>ARRIGHI, A., <i>Histoire de Pascal Paoli</i>, 2 tom., Paris, 1843.</p>

<p>BACON, Francis, <i>Philosophical Works</i>, edited by Ellis, Spedding, and<br/>

Heath, 7 vols., London, 1857-62; <i>Life and Letters</i>, edited by<br/>

Spedding, Ellis, and Heath, 7 vols., London, 1869-74.<br/>
</p>

<p>BAIN, Alexander, <i>Life of James Mill</i>, London, 1882.</p>

<p>BAKER, David Erskine, <i>Biographia Dramatica</i>. See REED, Isaac.</p>

<p>BARBAULD, Anna Letitia, <i>Works</i>, 2 vols., London, 1825; <i>Lessons for<br/>

Children</i>, London, 1878.<br/>
</p>

<p>BARCLAY, Robert, <i>An Apology</i>, London, 1703.</p>

<p>BARETTI, Joseph, <i>Account of Manners and Customs of Italy</i>, 2 vols.,
London, 1769; <i>Journey from London to Genoa</i>, 4 vols., London, 1770;
<i>Tolondron</i>, London, 1786.</p>

<p>BARRY, James, <i>Works</i>, 2 vols., London, 1809.</p>

<p>BEATTIE, James, <i>Life</i>. See FORBES, Sir William.</p>

<p>BELLAMY, George Anne, <i>An Apology for the Life of George Anne Bellamy</i>,
5 vols., London, 1786.</p>

<p>BERRY, Miss, <i>Journal and Correspondence</i>, 3 vols., London, 1865.</p>

<p>BEST, Henry Digby, <i>Personal and Literary Memorials</i>,<br/>

London, 1829.<br/>
</p>

<p>BLACKIE, C., <i>Etymological Geography</i>, London, 1875.</p>

<p>BLACKSTONE, Sir William, <i>Commentaries</i>, 4 vols., Oxford, 1778.</p>

<p>BLAIR, Hugh, <i>A Critical Dissertation on the Poems of Ossian, the son of<br/>

Fingal</i>, London, 1765.<br/>
</p>

<p>BOLINGBROKE, Lord Viscount, <i>Works, with Life by Dr. Goldsmith</i>, 8 vols.,<br/>

London, 1809.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Bookseller of the Last Century, being some account of the Life of John
Newbery</i>. By Charles WELSH, London, 1885.</p>

<p>BOSWELL, James, <i>British Essays in favour of the brave Corsicans</i>,
London, 1769; <i>Correspondence with the Honourable Andrew Erskine
and Journal of a Tour to Corsica</i>, edited by George Birkbeck Hill,
D.C.L., London, 1879; <i>The Cub at Newmarket</i>, 1762; <i>An Elegy on
the Death of an Amiable Young Lady</i>, with <i>An Epistle from Menalcas
to Lycidas</i>, 1761; <i>The Hypochondriack</i>, published in the <i>London
Magazine</i>, from 1777 to 1783; <i>Journal of a Tour to Corsica</i>: see above
under <i>Correspondence with the Hon. Andrew Erskine; Journal of a Tour
to the Hebrides</i>, first and second editions, 1785; third, 1786; fourth,
1807; <i>A Letter to the People of Scotland on the present state of the
Nation</i>, Edinburgh, 1783; <i>A Letter to the People of Scotland on the
Alarming Attempt to infringe the Articles of the Union and introduce a
Most Pernicious Innovation by Diminishing the Number of the Lords
of Session</i>, London, 1785; <i>Letters of James Boswell addressed to the
Rev. W.J. Temple</i>, London, 1857; <i>Ode to Tragedy</i>, 1661 (1761).</p>

<p><i>Boswelliana, The Common-place Book of James Boswell</i>, edited by Rev.
C. Rogers, LL.D., London, Grampian Club, 1876.</p>

<p><i>Boulter's Monument</i>, Dublin, 1745.</p>

<p>BOWEN, Emanuel, <i>A Complete System of Geography</i>, 2 vols., London, 1747.</p>

<p>BREWSTER, Sir David, <i>Memoirs of the Life, Writings, and Discoveries of<br/>

Sir Isaac Newton</i>, 2 vols., Edinburgh, 1860.<br/>
</p>

<p>BRIGHT, John, M.P., <i>Speeches</i>, edited by James E. Thorold Rogers,
2 vols., London, 1869.</p>

<p>BRITISH MUSEUM MSS., Letters by Johnson to Nichols, Add. MS. 5159.</p>

<p>BROOME, Herbert, <i>Constitutional Law</i>, London, 1885.</p>

<p>BROWNE, Sir Thomas, <i>Works</i>, 4 vols., London, 1836.</p>

<p>BRYDONE, Patrick, <i>Tour through Sicily and Malta</i>, 2 vols., London, 1790.</p>

<p>BURKE, Edmund, <i>Correspondence of the Right Hon. Edmund Burke</i>, 4 vols.,<br/>

London, 1844. See PAYNE, E.J., and PRIOR, Sir James.<br/>
</p>

<p>BURNET, Gilbert, Bishop of Salisbury, <i>History of his own Time</i>, 4 vols.,<br/>

London, 1818; <i>Vindication of the authority, &amp;c. of the Church and<br/>

State of Scotland</i>, Glasgow, 1673.<br/>
</p>

<p>BURNET, James (Lord Monboddo), <i>Origin of Languages</i>, 6 vols.,<br/>

Edinburgh, 1773-92.<br/>
</p>

<p>BURNET, Thomas, <i>Sacred Theory of the Earth</i>, 2 vols., London, 1722.</p>

<p>BURNEY, Dr. Charles, <i>Present State of Music in France and Italy</i>,
London, 1771; <i>Present State of Music in Germany</i>, 2 vols., London,
1773; <i>Memoirs</i>: see D'ARBLAY, Madame.</p>

<p>BURNEY, Frances, <i>Evelina</i>, 2 vols., London, 1784. See D'ARBLAY,<br/>

Madame.<br/>
</p>

<p>Burns, Life of. By James CURRIE, in <i>Works of Burns</i>, 1 vol., 1846.</p>

<p>BURTON, John Hill, <i>Life and Correspondence of David Hume</i>, 2 vols.,<br/>

Edinburgh, 1846; <i>Reign of Queen Anne</i>, 3 vols, Edinburgh, 1880.<br/>
</p>

<p>BUTLER, Samuel, <i>Hudibras</i>, 2 vols., London, 1806.</p>

<p>CALDERWOOD, Mrs., of Polton, <i>Letters and Journals</i>, Edinburgh, 1884.</p>

<p><i>Cambridge Shakespeare</i>. See SHAKESPEARE.</p>

<p>CAMDEN, William, <i>Remains</i>, London, 1870.</p>

<p>CAMPBELL, John, Lord, <i>Lives of the Chancellors</i>, 8 vols., London, 1846;
<i>Lives of the Chief Justices</i>, 3 vols., London, 1849-57.</p>

<p>CAMPBELL, Dr. John, <i>Hermippus Redivivus; or, The Sage's Triumph over<br/>

Old Age and the Grave</i>, London, 1744.<br/>
</p>

<p>CAMPBELL, Thomas, <i>Specimens of the British Poets</i>, London, 1845.</p>

<p>CAMPBELL, Rev. Dr. Thomas, <i>Diary of a Visit to England in</i> 1775 <i>by an<br/>

Irishman</i>, Sydney, 1854; <i>A Philosophical Survey of the South of<br/>

Ireland</i>, 1777.<br/>
</p>

<p>CARLYLE, Rev. Alexander, D.D., <i>Autobiography</i>, Edinburgh, 1860.</p>

<p>CARLYLE, Thomas, <i>French Revolution</i>, 2 vols., London, 1857; <i>Oliver<br/>

Cromwell's Letters and Speeches</i>, 3 vols., London, 1857; <i>Miscellanies</i>,<br/>

London, 1872.<br/>
</p>

<p>CARSTARES, Rev. William, <i>State Papers</i>, Edinburgh, 1774.</p>

<p>CARTE, Thomas, <i>History of the Life of James, Duke of Ormonde</i>, 3 vols.,<br/>

London, 1735-6.<br/>
</p>

<p>CARTER, Elizabeth, <i>Memoirs of her Life</i>, by Montagu Pennington, 2 vols.,<br/>

London, 1816.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Carter and Talbot Correspondence</i>, 4 vols., London, 1809.</p>

<p>CAVENDISH, H., <i>Debates of the House of Commons</i>, 2 vols., London, 1841-2.</p>

<p>CHALMERS, Alexander, <i>General Biographical Dictionary</i>, 32 vols., London,
1812-17; <i>British Essayists</i>, 38 vols., London, 1823.</p>

<p>CHALMERS, George, <i>Life of Ruddiman</i>, London, 1794.</p>

<p>CHAMBERS, Ephraim, <i>Cyclopaedia</i>, 2 vols., London, 1738.</p>

<p>CHAMBERS, Dr. Robert, <i>History of the Rebellion in Scotland in</i> 1745,
1746, Edinburgh, 1827; <i>Traditions of Edinburgh</i>, 2 vols.,
Edinburgh, 1825.</p>

<p>CHAPONE, Mrs. Hester, <i>Letters on the Improvement of the Mind, with the<br/>

Life of the Author</i>, London, 1806; <i>Posthumous Works</i>, 2 vols.,<br/>

London, 1807.<br/>
</p>

<p>CHAPPE D'AUTEROCHE, <i>Voyage en Sibérie</i>, 2 tom., Paris, 1768.</p>

<p>CHARLEMONT, Earl of, <i>Memoirs</i>. See HARDY, Francis.</p>

<p>CHATHAM, Earl of, <i>Correspondence</i>, 4 vols., London, 1838.</p>

<p>CHESTERFIELD, Earl of, <i>Letters to his Son</i>, 4 vols., London, 1774;
<i>Miscellaneous Works</i>, 4 vols., London, 1779.</p>

<p>CHEYNE, Dr. George, <i>English Malady, or a Treatise of Nervous Diseases
of all Kinds</i>, London, 1733.</p>

<p>CHURCHILL, Charles, <i>Poems</i>, 2 vols., London, 1766.</p>

<p>CLARENDON, Edward, Earl of, <i>History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in<br/>

England</i>, 8 vols., Oxford, 1826.<br/>
</p>

<p>COCKBURN, Henry Thomas (Lord), <i>Life of Lord Jeffrey</i>, 2 vols.,<br/>

Edinburgh, 1852.<br/>
</p>

<p>COLLINS, Arthur, <i>The Peerage of England</i>, 5 vols., London, 1756.</p>

<p>COLMAN, George, <i>Comedies of Terence</i>, 2 vols., London, 1768; <i>Prose on<br/>

Several Occasions</i>, 3 vols., London, 1787.<br/>
</p>

<p>COLMAN, George, Junior, <i>Random Records</i>, 2 vols., London, 1830.</p>

<p><i>Contemplation</i>, London, 1753.</p>

<p>CONWAY, Moncure, <i>Thomas Carlyle</i>, London, 1881.</p>

<p>COOKE, William, <i>Memoirs of Charles Macklin</i>, London, 1806.</p>

<p>COURTENAY, John, <i>A Poetical Review of the Literary and Moral Character
of the late S. Johnson</i>, London, 1786.</p>

<p>COWPER, William, <i>Life</i>. See under SOUTHEY.</p>

<p>COXE, Rev. William, <i>Memoirs of Sir Robert Walpole</i>, 3 vols., London,
1798.</p>

<p>CRABBE, Rev. George, <i>Life and Poems</i>, 8 vols., London, 1834.</p>

<p>CRADOCK, Joseph, <i>Literary Memoirs</i>, 4 vols., London, 1828.</p>

<p>CROKER, Right Hon. John Wilson, <i>Boswell's Life of Johnson</i>, 1 vol. 8vo.,
London, 1866; <i>Correspondence and Diaries</i>, edited by Louis J. Jennings,
3 vols., London, 1884.</p>

<p>CUMBERLAND, Richard, <i>Memoirs</i>, 2 vols., London, 1807.</p>

<p>DALRYMPLE, Sir David (Lord Hailes), <i>Remarks on the History of Scotland</i>,<br/>

Edinburgh, 1773.<br/>
</p>

<p>DALRYMPLE, Sir John, <i>Memoirs of Great Britain and Ireland</i>, Edinburgh
and London, 1771-8.</p>

<p>D'ARBLAY, Madame, <i>Diary and Letters</i>, 7 vols., London, 1842; <i>Memoirs
of Dr. Burney</i>, 3 vols., London, 1832.</p>

<p>DAVIES, Thomas, <i>Dramatic Miscellanies</i>, 3 vols., London, 1785; <i>Memoirs
of the Life of David Garrick</i>, 2 vols., London, 1781; <i>Miscellaneous
and Fugitive Pieces</i>, 3 vols., London, 1773-4.</p>

<p>DEAN, Rev. Richard, <i>Essay on the Future Life of Brutes</i>,<br/>

Manchester, 1767.<br/>
</p>

<p>DELANY, Dr., <i>Observations on Swift</i>, London, 1754.</p>

<p>DE QUINCEY, Thomas, <i>Works</i>, 16 vols., Edinburgh, 1862.</p>

<p>DICEY, Professor Albert Venn, <i>Lectures introductory to the Study of the<br/>

Law of the Constitution</i>, London, 1885.<br/>
</p>

<p>DIDEROT, Denys, <i>Oeuvres</i>, Paris, 1821.</p>

<p>D'ISRAELI, Isaac, <i>Calamities of Authors</i>, 2 vols., London, 1812;
<i>Curiosities of Literature</i>, 6 vols., London, 1834.</p>

<p>DOBLE, C.E., <i>Thomas Hearne's Remarks and Collections</i>, vol. i., Oxford,
1885.</p>

<p>DODD, Rev. Dr. William, <i>The Convict's Address to his Unhappy Brethren</i>,
1777.</p>

<p>DODSLEY, Robert, <i>A Muse in Livery; or, The Footman's Miscellany</i>,<br/>

London, 1732; <i>Collection of Poems by Several Hands</i>, 6 vols.,<br/>

London, 1758.<br/>
</p>

<p>DRUMMOND, William, of Hawthorne-denne, <i>Flowers of Sion</i>, Edinburgh,
1630; <i>Polemo-Middinia</i>, Oxford, 1691.</p>

<p>DRYDEN, John, <i>Comedies, Tragedies, and Operas</i>, 2 vols., London, 1701.</p>

<p>DUMONT, Etienne, <i>Recollections of Mirabeau</i>, London, 1835.</p>

<p>DUPPA, R., <i>Diary of a Journey into North Wales in the year 1774, by<br/>

Samuel Johnson</i>, London, 1816. (See <i>ante</i>, vol. v. p. 427.)<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Edinburgh Review</i>, Edinburgh, 1753.</p>

<p>ELDON, Lord Chancellor, <i>Life</i>. See Twiss, Horace.</p>

<p>ELWALL, E., <i>The Grand Question in Religion Considered</i>, London.</p>

<p>ERASMUS, <i>Adagiorum Chiliades</i>, 1559; <i>Colloquia Familiaria</i>, 2 vols.,<br/>

Leipsic, 1867.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Farm and its Inhabitants, with some Account of the Lloyds of Dolobran</i>,
by Rachel J. Lowe, privately printed, 1883.</p>

<p>FIELD, Rev. William, <i>Memoirs of the Rev. Samuel Parr</i>, LL.D., 2 vols.,<br/>

London, 1828.<br/>
</p>

<p>FIELDING, Henry, <i>Works</i>, 10 vols., London, 1806.</p>

<p>FITZGERALD, Percy, <i>The Life of David Garrick</i>, 2 vols., London,
1868.</p>

<p>FITZMAURICE, Lord Edmond, <i>Life of William, Earl of Shelburne</i>, 3 vols.,<br/>

London, 1875.<br/>
</p>

<p>FORBES, Sir William, <i>Life of James Beattie</i>, London, 1824.</p>

<p>FORSTER, John, <i>Historical and Biographical Essays</i>, 2 vols., London,
1858; <i>Life and Times of Oliver Goldsmith</i>, 2 vols., London,
1871.</p>

<p>Foss, Edward, <i>Lives of the Judges of England</i>, 9 vols., London, 1848-64.</p>

<p><i>Foundling Hospital for Wit</i>, London, 1771-3.</p>

<p>FRANKLIN, Dr. Benjamin, <i>Memoirs</i>, 6 vols., London, 1818.</p>

<p>FREDERICK II (the Great), of Prussia, <i>Oeuvres</i>, 30 tom., Berlin, 1846-56.</p>

<p>FROUDE, James Anthony, <i>Thomas Carlyle</i>, vols. i. and ii., London, 1882;
vols. iii. and iv., 1885.</p>

<p>GARDEN, F. (Lord Gardenston), <i>Miscellanies</i>, Edinburgh, 1792.</p>

<p>GARRICK, David, <i>Private Correspondence</i>, 2 vols., London, 1831; <i>Life</i>:
see DAVIES, Thomas; FITZGERALD, Percy; and MURPHY, Arthur.</p>

<p>GIBBON, Edward, <i>Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire</i>, 12 vols.<br/>

London, 1807; <i>Miscellaneous Works</i>, 5 vols., London, 1814.<br/>
</p>

<p>GOLDSMITH, Oliver, <i>History of the Earth and Animated Nature</i>, 8 vols.,
London, 1779; <i>Miscellaneous Works</i>, 4 vols., London, 1801; <i>Works</i>,
edited by Cunningham, 4 vols., London, 1854.</p>

<p>GRAY, Thomas, <i>Works, with Memoirs of his Life</i>, by the Rev. William
Mason, 2 vols., London, 1807; <i>Works</i>, edited by the Rev. John Mitford,
5 vols., London, 1858; <i>Works</i>, edited by Edmund Gosse, London, 1884.</p>

<p>GREVILLE, Charles C.F., <i>Greville Memoirs</i>, edited by Henry Reeve,
3 vols., London, 1874; second part, 3 vols., London, 1885.</p>

<p>GRIMM, Baron, <i>Correspondance Littéraire</i>, 1829.</p>

<p>HALL, Robert, <i>Works</i>, 6 vols., London, 1834.</p>

<p>HAMILTON, Right Hon. William Gerard, <i>Parliamentary Logick</i>, London,
1808.</p>

<p>HAMILTON, William, of Bangour, <i>Poems</i>, Edinburgh, 1760.</p>

<p>HARDY, Francis, <i>Memoirs of the Earl of Charlemont</i>, 2 vols., London,
1812.</p>

<p>HARGRAVE, Francis, <i>An Argument in the Case of James Sommersett</i>,<br/>

London, 1772.<br/>
</p>

<p>HARWOOD, Rev. Thomas, <i>History of Lichfield</i>, Gloucester, 1806.</p>

<p>HAWKESWORTH, John, <i>Voyages of Discovery in the Southern Hemisphere</i>,
3 vols., London, 1773.</p>

<p>HAWKINS, Sir John, <i>Life of Samuel Johnson</i>, London, 1787; Johnson's
<i>Works</i>: See JOHNSON, Samuel.</p>

<p>HAWKINS, Laetitia Matilda, <i>Memoirs, Anecdotes, &amp;c.</i>, 2 vols., London,
1824.</p>

<p>HAYWARD, Abraham, <i>Mrs. Piozzi's Autobiography</i>, 2 vols., London, 1861.</p>

<p>HAZLITT, William, <i>Conversations of James Northcote, R.A.</i>, London, 1830.</p>

<p>HEARNE, Thomas, <i>Remains</i>, edited by Philip Bliss, 3 vols., London, 1869;
<i>Remarks and Collections</i>, edited by C.E. Doble, vol. i., Oxford, 1885.</p>

<p><i>Herodotus</i>, edited by Rev. J.W. Blakesley, 2 vols., London, 1854.</p>

<p>HERVEY, Rev. James, <i>Meditations</i>, London, 1748.</p>

<p>HILL, George Birkbeck, <i>Dr. Johnson: his Friends and his Critics</i>,<br/>

London, 1878; <i>Boswell's Correspondence with the Hon. Andrew Erskine, and<br/>

Journal of a Tour to Corsica</i>, London, 1879.<br/>
</p>

<p>HOGG, James, <i>Jacobite Relics</i>, 2 vols., Edinburgh, 1819.</p>

<p>HOLCROFT, Thomas, <i>Memoirs</i>, 3 vols., London, 1816.</p>

<p>HOME, Henry. See KAMES, Lord.</p>

<p>HORNE, Dr. George, Bishop of Norwich, <i>A Letter to Adam Smith</i>, Oxford,
1777; <i>Essays and Thoughts on Various Subjects</i>, London, 1808.</p>

<p>HORNE, Rev. John. See TOOKE, Horne.</p>

<p>HORREBOW, Niels, <i>Natural History of Iceland</i>, London, 1758.</p>

<p><i>House of Lords, Scotch Appeal Cases</i>, vol. xvii.</p>

<p>HOWELL, James, <i>Epistoloe</i>, London, 1737.</p>

<p>HOWELL, T.B. and T.J., <i>State Trials</i>, 33 vols., London, 1809-1826.</p>

<p>HUME, David, <i>Essays</i>, 4 vols., London, 1770; <i>History of England</i>,
8 vols., London, 1802; <i>Private Correspondence</i>, London, 1820; <i>Life</i>:
see BURTON, John Hill.</p>

<p>HUSBANDS, J., <i>A Miscellany of Poems</i>, Oxford, 1731.</p>

<p>HUTTON, William, <i>History of Derby</i>, London, 1791; <i>Life</i>, London, 1816.</p>

<p>JAMES, Robert, M.D., <i>Dissertation on Fevers</i>, London, 1770.</p>

<p>JEFFREY, Lord, <i>Life</i>. See COCKBURN, H.J.</p>

<p>JOHNSON, Samuel, <i>Annals of Johnson, being an Account of the Life of
Dr. Samuel Johnson from his Birth to his Eleventh Year</i>, London,
1805; <i>Diary of a Journey into North Wales</i>: see DUPPA, R; <i>Dictionary</i>,
first edition, London, 1755; fourth edition, London, 1773;
<i>Abridgment</i>, London, 1766; <i>Letters</i>, published by Hester Lynch
Piozzi, 2 vols., London, 1788; <i>Life</i>, printed for G. Kearsley, London,
1785; <i>Memoirs of the Life and Writings of the late Dr. Samuel
Johnson</i>, printed for J. Walker, London, 1785; <i>Prayers and Meditations
composed by Samuel Johnson</i>, second edition, London, 1785;
<i>Rasselas</i>, edited by the Rev. W. West, London, 1869; <i>Works</i>, edited
by Sir John Hawkins, 13 vols. (the last two vols. by the Rev. Percival
Stockdale), London, 1787-9: vol. xi. contains a collection of Johnson's
<i>Apophthegms; Works</i>, 9 vols.; <i>Parliamentary Debates</i>, 2 vols. (11 vols.
in all), Oxford, 1825.</p>

<p><i>Johnsoniana</i>, published by John Murray, London, 1836.</p>

<p>JOHNSTONE, John. See PARR, Samuel.</p>

<p>JONES, Sir William. See TEIGNMOUTH, Lord.</p>

<p>JONSON, Ben, <i>Works</i>, 7 vols., London, 1756.</p>

<p>KAMES, Lord (Henry Home), <i>Sketches of the History of Man</i>, 4 vols.,<br/>

Edinburgh, 1788.<br/>
</p>

<p>KING, Dr. William, Principal of St. Mary Hall,<i> Anecdotes of His Own<br/>

Times</i>, London, 1819.<br/>
</p>

<p>KING, William, Archbishop of Dublin, <i>Essay on the Origin of Evil</i>,
edited by Bishop Law, 1781.</p>

<p>KNIGHT, Charles, <i>English Cyclopedia (Biography)</i>, 6 vols.,<br/>

London 1856-1858.<br/>
</p>

<p>KNOX, Rev. Dr. Vicesimus, <i>Works</i>, 7 vols., London, 1824.</p>

<p>LAMB, Charles, <i>Works</i>, edited by Sir Thomas Noon Talfourd,<br/>

London, 1865.<br/>
</p>

<p>LANDOR, Walter Savage, <i>Works</i>, 8 vols., London, 1874.</p>

<p>LANGTON, Bennet, <i>Collection of Anecdotes of Dr. Johnson</i>, <i>ante</i>,
iv. 1-33.</p>

<p>LAW, Bishop Edmund. See KING, Archbishop.</p>

<p>LECKY, W.E.H., <i>History of England in the Eighteenth Century</i>, 4 vols.<br/>

London, 1878-82.<br/>
</p>

<p>LESLIE, Charles Robert, R.A., <i>Autobiographical Recollections</i>, London
1860.</p>

<p>LESLIE, Charles Robert, R.A., and TOM TAYLOR, <i>Life and Times of Sir<br/>

Joshua Reynolds</i>, 2 vols., London, 1865.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Lexiphanes: a Dialogue</i>, London, 1767.</p>

<p>LITTLETON, Dr. Adam, <i>Linguae Latinae Liber Dietionarius</i>, London, 1678
and 1703.</p>

<p>LOCKE, John, <i>Works</i>, London, 1824.</p>

<p>LOCKHART, J. G., <i>Memoirs of the Life of Sir Walter Scott</i>, Bart.,
10 vols., Edinburgh, 1839.</p>

<p>LOFFT, Capel, <i>Reports of Cases</i>, London, 1776.</p>

<p><i>London and its Environs</i>, Dodsley, 6 vols., London, 1761.</p>

<p>LOWE, Charles, <i>Prince Bismarck; an Historical Biography</i>, 2 vols.,<br/>

London, 1885.<br/>
</p>

<p>LOWNDES, William Thomas,<i> Bibliographer's Manual</i>, 4 vols., London, 1871.</p>

<p>MACAULAY, Rev. Kenneth, <i>History of St. Kilda</i>, London, 1764.</p>

<p>MACAULAY, Thomas Babington, <i>Critical and Historical Essays</i>, 3 vols.,<br/>

London, 1843, and 4 vols., 1874; <i>History of England</i>, 8 vols.,<br/>

London, 1874; <i>Miscellaneous Writings and Speeches</i>, London, 1871;<br/>

<i>Life</i>: see TREVELYAN, George Otto.<br/>
</p>

<p>MACKENZIE, Sir George, <i>Works</i>, Edinburgh, 1716-22.</p>

<p>MACKENZIE, Henry, <i>Life of John Home</i>, Edinburgh, 1822.</p>

<p>MACKINTOSH, Sir James, <i>Memoirs of his Life</i>, 2 vols., London, 1836.</p>

<p>MACKLIN, Charles, <i>Life</i>. See COOKE, William.</p>

<p>McNEILL, P., <i>Tranent and its Surroundings</i>, 2nd ed., Edinburgh and<br/>

Glasgow, 1884.<br/>
</p>

<p>MADAN, Rev. Martin, <i>Thoughts on Executive Justice</i>, London, 1785.</p>

<p>MAHON, Lord. See STANHOPE, Earl.</p>

<p>MAINE, Sir Henry Sumner, <i>Lectures on Early History of Institutions</i>,<br/>

London, 1875.<br/>
</p>

<p>MAITTAIRE, M., <i>Senilia</i>, London, 1742.</p>

<p>MANDEVILLE, Bernard, <i>Fable of the Bees</i>, 1724.</p>

<p>MARSHALL, William, <i>Minutes on Agriculture</i>, London, 1799.</p>

<p>MARTIN, M., <i>A Description of the Western Islands</i>, London, 1716;
<i>Voyage to St. Kilda</i>, London, 1753.</p>

<p>MASON, William, <i>Life of Gray</i>. See GRAY, Thomas.</p>

<p>MAXWELL, Rev. Dr. William, <i>Collectanea</i>, <i>ante</i>, ii. 116-133.</p>

<p>MICKLE, William Julius, <i>The Lusiad</i>, Oxford, 1778.</p>

<p>MILL, James, <i>History of British India</i>, London, 1840; <i>Life</i>: see BAIN,<br/>

Alexander.<br/>
</p>

<p>MILL, John Stuart, <i>Autobiography</i>, London, 1873; <i>Principles of<br/>

Political Economy</i>, 2 vols., London, 1865.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Modern Characters from Shakespeare</i>, London, 1778.</p>

<p>MONBODDO, Lord. See BURNET, James.</p>

<p>MONTAGU, Mrs. Elizabeth, <i>Essay on the Writings of Shakespeare</i>, London,
1769; <i>Letters</i>, 4 vols., London, 1810.</p>

<p>MONTAGUE, Lady Mary Wortley, <i>Letters</i>, London, 1769.</p>

<p>MOORE, John, M.D., <i>Journal during a Residence in France</i>, 2 vols.,
London, 1793; <i>Life of Smollett</i>, 1797; <i>View of Society and Manners
in France, Switzerland, and Germany</i>, 2 vols., London, 1789.</p>

<p>MOORE, Thomas, <i>Life of R.B. Sheridan</i>, 2 vols., London, 1825.</p>

<p>MORE, Hannah, <i>Life and Correspondence</i>, 4 vols., London, 1834.</p>

<p>MORRIS, William, <i>AEneids of Virgil done into English verse</i>, London,
1876.</p>

<p>MORRISON, Alfred, <i>Catalogue of the Collection of Autograph Letters,
&amp;c.</i>, formed by Alfred Morrison, edited by A. W. Thibaudeau, printed
for private circulation, London, 1883.</p>

<p>MUNK, William, <i>The Roll of the Royal College of Physicians of London</i>,
3 vols., London, 1878.</p>

<p>MURPHY, Arthur, <i>Essay on the Life and Genius of Samuel Johnson</i>,<br/>

London, 1792; <i>Life of David Garrick</i>, Dublin, 1801.<br/>
</p>

<p>MURRAY, John, <i>Guide to Scotland</i>, London, 1867, 1883; <i>Johnsoniana</i>,<br/>

London, 1836.<br/>
</p>

<p>NAPIER, Rev. Alexander, <i>Boswell's Life of Johnson</i>, 5 vols., London,
1884.</p>

<p><i>New Foundling Hospital for Wit</i>, 3 vols., London, 1769.</p>

<p>NEWMAN, John Henry, <i>History of my Religious Opinions</i>, London, 1865.</p>

<p>NEWTON, Rev. John, <i>An Authentic Narrative of some remarkable and
interesting particulars in the Life of</i>, London, 1792.</p>

<p>NEWTON, Thomas, Bishop of Bristol, <i>Works</i>, 3 vols., London, 1782.</p>

<p>NICHOLS, John, <i>Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century</i>, 9 vols.,<br/>

London, 1812-15; <i>Literary History</i>, 8 vols., London, 1817-58.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Ninth Report of the Commissioners of the Post-office</i>, London, 1837.</p>

<p>NORTHCOTE, James, <i>Life of Sir Joshua Reynolds</i>, 2 vols., London, 1819.<br/>

See HAZLITT, William, for Northcote's <i>Conversations</i>.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Nouvelle Biographie Générale</i>, 46 vols., Paris, 1855-1866.</p>

<p>O'LEARY, Rev. Arthur, <i>Remarks on the Rev. Mr. Wesley's Letters</i>, Dublin
1780.</p>

<p>ORRERY, —— John, fifth Earl of Orrery and Corke, <i>Remarks on the Life
and Writings of Dr. Swift</i>, London, 1752.</p>

<p>ORTON, Job, <i>Memoirs of Doddridge</i>, Salop, 1766.</p>

<p><i>Oxford during the Last Century</i> [by G. Roberson and J.R. Green],
Oxford, 1859.</p>

<p>PALEY, Rev. William, D.D., <i>Principles of Philosophy</i>, London, 1786.</p>

<p><i>Parliamentary History of England</i>, 33 vols., London, 1806.</p>

<p>PARR, Samuel, LL.D., <i>Works, with Memoir</i>, by John Johnstone, M.D.
8 vols., London, 1828. See FIELD, Rev. William.</p>

<p>PATERSON, Daniel, <i>British Itinerary</i>, 2 vols., London, 1800.</p>

<p>PATTISON, Mark, <i>Memoirs</i>, London, 1885. See POPE, Alexander.</p>

<p>PAYNE, E.J., <i>Select Works of Burke</i>, 2 vols., Oxford, 1874.</p>

<p>PENNANT, Thomas, <i>Literary Life</i>, London, 1793; <i>Tour in Scotland</i>,<br/>

  London, 1772.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Penny Cyclopaedia</i>, 27 vols., London, 1833.</p>

<p>PEPYS, Samuel, <i>Diary and Correspondence</i>, 5 vols., London, 1851.</p>

<p>PHILIPPS, Erasmus, <i>Diary</i>, published in <i>Notes and Queries</i>, second
series, x. 443.</p>

<p>PILKINGTON, James, <i>A View of the Present State of Derbyshire</i>, 2 vols.,<br/>

Derby, 1789.<br/>
</p>

<p>PINKERTON, John, <i>Voyages</i>, 17 vols., London, 1808-1814.</p>

<p>PIOZZI, Hester Lynch, <i>Anecdotes of the late Samuel Johnson</i>,<br/>

fourth edition, London, 1786; <i>Autobiography: see</i> under HAYWARD,<br/>

Abraham; <i>British Synonymy</i>, 2 vols., London, 1794; <i>Journey through<br/>

France, Italy, and Germany</i>, 2 vols., London, 1789.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Piozzi Letters. See</i> under JOHNSON, Samuel.</p>

<p>POPE, Alexander, <i>Works</i>, edited by Rev. W. Elwin and W.J. Courthope,<br/>

  10 vols., London, 1871-86; <i>Satires and Epistles</i>, edited by Mark<br/>

  Pattison, Oxford, 1872.<br/>
</p>

<p>PORSON, Richard, <i>Tracts and Miscellaneous Criticisms</i>, London, 1815.</p>

<p>PRIESTLEY, Joseph, <i>Works</i>, 25 vols., London, 1817-31.</p>

<p>PRIOR, Sir James, <i>Life of Edmund Burke</i> (Bohn's British Classics),
London, 1872; <i>Life of Oliver Goldsmith</i>, 2 vols., London, 1837;
<i>Life of Edmond Malone</i>, London, 1860.</p>

<p><i>Probationary Odes for the Laureateship</i>, London.</p>

<p>PSALMANAZAR, George, <i>Historical and Geographical Description of Formosa</i>,<br/>

London, 1704; <i>Memoirs</i>, London, 1764.<br/>
</p>

<p>RADCLIFFE, John, <i>Some Memoirs of his Life</i>, London, 1715.</p>

<p>RANKE, Professor, <i>The Popes of Rome</i>. Translated from the German by<br/>

Sarah Austin, 3 vols., London, 1866.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Recreations and Studies of a Country Clergyman of the Eighteenth Century.
See</i> TWINING, Rev. Thomas.</p>

<p>REED, Isaac, <i>Baker's Biographia Dramatica</i>, 3 vols., London, 1812.</p>

<p>REYNOLDS, Sir Joshua, <i>Life</i>: see under LESLIE and NORTHCOTE; <i>Works</i>,
3 vols., London, 1824.</p>

<p>RICHARDSON, Samuel, <i>Correspondence</i>, 6 vols., London, 1804; <i>One hundred
and seventy-three Letters written for particular Friends on the most
important occasions</i>, seventh edition, London, no date.</p>

<p>RITSON, Joseph, <i>English Songs</i>, 3 vols., London, 1813.</p>

<p>ROBINSON, Henry Crabb, <i>Diary, Reminiscences, and Correspondence</i>,
3 vols., London, 1869.</p>

<p>ROGERS, Samuel, <i>Table Talk</i>, London, 1856.</p>

<p><i>Rolliad, The</i>, London, 1795.</p>

<p>ROMILLY, Sir Samuel, <i>Memoirs of his Life</i>, 3 vols., London, 1840.</p>

<p>ROSE, Hugh James, <i>New General Biographical Dictionary</i>, 12 vols.,<br/>

London, 1840-1848.<br/>
</p>

<p>RUSKIN, John, <i>Lectures on Architecture and Painting</i>, London, 1854;
<i>Praeterita</i>, Orpington, 1886.</p>

<p>SACHEVERELL, W., <i>An Account of the Isle of Man, with a Voyage to<br/>

I-Columb-Kill</i>, London, 1702.<br/>
</p>

<p>SAVAGE, Richard, <i>Works</i>, 2 vols., London, 1777.</p>

<p>SCOTT, Sir Walter, <i>Life of Swift</i>, London, 1834; Novels, 41 vols.,<br/>

Edinburgh, 1860; <i>Life</i>: See under LOCKHART.<br/>
</p>

<p>SELWYN, George, <i>Life and Correspondence</i>. By J.H. Jesse, 4 vols.,<br/>

London, 1843.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Session Papers of Old Bailey Trials for 1758</i>, London.</p>

<p>SEWARD, Anna, <i>Elegy on Captain Cook</i>, London, 1781; <i>Letters</i>, 6 vols.,<br/>

Edinburgh, 1811.<br/>
</p>

<p>SEWARD, William, <i>Anecdotes of Distinguished Persons</i>, 4 vols., London,
1798; <i>Biographiana</i>, 2 vols., London, 1799.</p>

<p>Shakespeare, edited by W.G. Clark and W. Aldis Wright, 9 vols.,<br/>

Cambridge, 1864-66.<br/>
</p>

<p>SHELBURNE, Earl of, <i>Life</i>. See FITZMAURICE, Lord Edmond.</p>

<p>SHENSTONE, William, <i>Works</i>, 3 vols., London, 1773.</p>

<p>SMART, Christopher, <i>Poems on Several Occasions</i>, London, 1752.</p>

<p>SMOLLETT, Tobias, <i>History of England</i>, 5 vols., London, 1800; <i>Travels
through France and Italy</i>, 2 vols., London, 1766.</p>

<p>SOUTHEY, Robert, <i>Life and Correspondence</i>, 6 vols., London, 1849;
<i>Life and Works of William Cowper</i>, 15 vols., London, 1835; <i>Life of John
Wesley</i>, 2 vols., London, 1846.</p>

<p>SPENCE, Rev. Joseph, <i>Anecdotes</i>, London, 1820.</p>

<p><i>Spiritual Quixote</i>, 3 vols., London, 1773.</p>

<p>STANHOPE, Earl, <i>History of England</i>, 7 vols., London, 1836-1854;
<i>History of the War of the Succession in Spain</i>, London, 1832-3;
<i>Life of William Pitt</i>, 4 vols., London, 1861.</p>

<p>STANLEY, Arthur Penrhyn, <i>Historical Memorials of Westminster Abbey</i>,<br/>

London, 1868.<br/>
</p>

<p>STEELE, Sir Richard, <i>Apology for Himself and his Writings</i>, London,
1714.</p>

<p>STEPHENS, Alexander, <i>Memoirs of Horne Tooke</i>, 2 vols., London, 1813.</p>

<p>STERNE, Lawrence, <i>Sentimental Journey</i>, 2 vols., London, 1775.</p>

<p>STEWART, Dugald, <i>An Account of the Life and Writings of Thomas Reid,<br/>

William Robertson, and Adam Smith</i>, Edinburgh, 1811; also <i>Life of<br/>

Reid</i>, Edinburgh, 1802; <i>Life of Robertson</i>, Edinburgh, 1802.<br/>
</p>

<p>STOCKDALE, Rev. Percival, <i>Memoirs</i>, London, 1809; <i>The Remonstrance</i>,<br/>

London, 1770.<br/>
</p>

<p>STORY, Thomas, <i>Journal of his Life</i>, 2 vols., Newcastle-upon-Tyne,
1747.</p>

<p>SWIFT, Jonathan, <i>Works</i>, 24 vols., London, 1803; <i>Life</i>: See SCOTT,<br/>

Sir Walter.<br/>
</p>

<p>SYDENHAM, Thomas, <i>Works</i>, London, 1685.</p>

<p>TAYLOR, Jeremy, <i>Works</i>, 10 vols., London, 1864.</p>

<p>TAYLOR, Tom, <i>Life of Sir Joshua Reynolds</i>. See under LESLIE, C.R.</p>

<p>TEIGNMOUTH, Lord, <i>Memoirs of the Life of Sir William Jones</i>, London,
1815.</p>

<p>TEMPLE, Sir William, <i>Works</i>, 4 vols., London, 1757.</p>

<p>THACKERAY, W.M., <i>English Humourists</i>, London, 1858.</p>

<p>THICKNESSE, Philip, <i>A Year's Journey through France and part of Spain</i>,
2 vols., Bath and London, 1770.</p>

<p>TICKELL, Richard, <i>Epistle from the Hon. Charles Fox to the Hon. John<br/>

Townshend</i>, 1779.<br/>
</p>

<p>TILLOTSON, John, <i>Sermons preached upon Several Occasions</i>, London,
1673.</p>

<p>TIMMINS, Samuel, <i>Dr. Johnson in Birmingham: a Paper read to the<br/>

Archaeological Section of the Birmingham and Midland Institute</i>,<br/>

Nov. 22, 1876, and reprinted from Transactions_ (12 copies only),<br/>

quarto, pp. viii.<br/>
</p>

<p>TOOKE, Home, <i>Diversions of Purley</i>, London, 1798; <i>Life</i>:<br/>

See STEPHENS, Alexander; <i>A Letter to John Dunning, Esq.</i>,<br/>

London, 1778.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Tour through the Whole Island of Great Britain</i>, originally begun by
De Foe, 4 vols., London, 1769.</p>

<p>TREVELYAN, George Otto, <i>Life and Letters of Lord Macaulay</i>, 2 vols.,<br/>

London, 1877.<br/>
</p>

<p>TWINING, Rev. Thomas, <i>Recreations and Studies of a Country Clergyman
of the Eighteenth Century</i>, London, 1882.</p>

<p>Twiss, Horace, <i>Life of Lord Chancellor Eldon</i>, 3 vols., London, 1844.</p>

<p>TYERMAN, Rev. Luke, <i>Life of George Whitefield</i>, 2 vols.,<br/>

London, 1876-7.<br/>
</p>

<p>VICTOR, Benjamin, <i>Original Letters</i>, London, 1776.</p>

<p>VOLTAIRE, <i>Oeuvres Complètes</i>, 66 tom., Paris, 1819-25.</p>

<p>WALPOLE, Horace, <i>Journal of the Reign of King George III</i>, 2 vols.,<br/>

London, 1859; <i>Letters</i>, 9 vols., London, 1861; <i>Memoirs of the<br/>

Reign of George II</i>, 3 vols., London, 1846; <i>Memoirs of the Reign of<br/>

King George III</i>, 4 vols., London, 1845.<br/>
</p>

<p>WALTON, Izaak, <i>Lives</i>, London, 1838.</p>

<p>WARBURTON, William, <i>Divine Legation of Moses</i>, 5 vols., London, 1765.</p>

<p>WARNER, Rebecca, <i>Original Letters</i>, Bath and London, 1817.</p>

<p>WARNER, Rev. Richard, <i>A Tour through the Northern Counties of England</i>,<br/>

Bath, 1802.<br/>
</p>

<p>WARTON, Dr. Joseph, <i>Essay on Pope</i>, London, vol. i. 1772; vol. ii. 1782;
<i>Life</i>: See under WOOLL.</p>

<p>WARTON, Rev. Thomas, <i>Poetical Works</i>, 2 vols., Oxford, 1802.</p>

<p>WATSON, Richard, Bishop of Llandaff, <i>A Letter to the Archbishop of<br/>

Canterbury</i>, London, 1783.<br/>
</p>

<p>WESLEY, John, <i>Journals</i>, 4 vols., London, 1827; <i>Life</i>: See under<br/>

SOUTHEY.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Westminster Abbey, with other Poems</i>, 1813.</p>

<p>WHYTE, Samuel, <i>Miscellanea Nova</i>, Dublin, 1800.</p>

<p>WILKES, John, <i>Correspondence</i>. See ALMON, John.</p>

<p>WILLIAMS, Anna, <i>Miscellanies</i>, London, 1766.</p>

<p>WILLIAMS, Sir Charles Hanbury, <i>Odes</i>, London, 1775.</p>

<p>WINDHAM, William, Right Hon., <i>Diary</i>, London, 1866.</p>

<p>WOOD, Robert, <i>The Ruins of Palmyra</i>, London, 1753; <i>The Ruins of<br/>

Balbec</i>, London, 1757.<br/>
</p>

<p>WOOLL, John, D.D., <i>Biographical Memoirs of Dr. Joseph Warton</i>, 1 vol.
(vol. ii. never published), London, 1806.</p>

<p>WORDSWORTH, William, <i>Works</i>, 6 vols., London, 1857.</p>

<p>WRAXALL, Sir Nathaniel William, Bart., <i>Historical Memoirs of My Own
Time</i>, 2 vols., London, 1815; also edited by H.B. Wheatley, 5
vols., London, 1884.</p>

<p>YOUNG, Arthur, <i>Six Months' Tour through the North of England</i>, 4 vols.,<br/>

London, 1770-1.<br/>
</p>

<h2>ADDENDA</h2>

<p>Last summer Messrs. Sotheby and Wilkinson sold some very interesting
autograph letters written by Johnson to William Strahan, the printer.</p>

<p>I was fortunate enough to find that the purchasers, with but one
exception, were mindful of what Boswell so well describes as 'the general
courtesy of literature[1],' and were ready to place their treasures
at my service. To one of them, Mr. Frederick Barker, of 43, Rowan Road,
Brook Green, I am still more indebted, for he entrusted me not only with
the original letters which he had just bought, but also with some others
that he had previously possessed. His Johnsonian collection is one of
unusual interest. I have moreover to acknowledge my obligations to
Mr. Fawcett, of 14, King Street, Covent Garden; to Messrs. J. Pearson
and Co., of 46, Pall Mall; to Messrs. Robson and Kerslake, of Coventry
Street, Haymarket; to Mr. Frank T. Sabin, of 10 and 12, Garrick Street,
Covent Garden; and to Mr. John Waller, of 2, Artesian Road, Westbourne
Grove. Those of the letters which are undated, I have endeavoured to
assign to their proper places by internal evidence. The absence of a
date is in itself very strong evidence that they belong to a comparatively
early period (see <i>ante</i>, i. 122, n. 2).</p>

<p>[Footnote 1: Ante, iv. 246.]</p>

<h4>I.</h4>

<p><i>A letter about a projected Geographical Dictionary by Mr. Bathurst, with
Bathurst's Proposal; dated March 22, probably written in 1753</i>.[In the
possession of Mr. Frederick Barker, of 43, Rowan Road, Brook Green.]</p>

<h5>'SIR,</h5>

<p>'I have inclosed the Scheme which I mentioned yesterday in which the work
proposed is sufficiently explained.</p>

<p>'The Undertaker, Mr. Bathurst, is a Physician of the University of
Cambridge, of about eight years standing, and will perform the work in
such a manner as may satisfy the publick. No advice of mine will be
wanting, but advice will be all that I propose to contribute unless it
should be thought worth while that I should write a preface, which if
desired I will do and put my name to it. The terms which I am commissioned
to offer are these:</p>

<p>'1. A guinea and half shall be paid for each sheet of the copy.</p>

<p>'2. The authour will receive a Guinea and half a week from the date of
the Contract.</p>

<p>'3. As it is certain that many books will be necessary, the Authour will
at the end of the work take the books furnished him in part of payment
at prime Cost, which will be a considerable reduction of the price of
the Copy; or if it seems as you thought yesterday no reduction, he will
allow out of the last payment fifty pounds for the use of the Books and
return them.</p>

<p>'4. In two months after his first demand of books shall be supplied,
he purposes to write three Sheets a week and to continue the same
quantity to the end of the work, unless he shall be hindered by want of
Books. He does not however expect to be always able to write according
to the order of the Alphabet but as his Books shall happen to supply him,
and therefore cannot send any part to the press till the whole is nearly
finished.</p>

<p>'5. He undertakes as usual the Correction.</p>

<p>'I am, Sir, Your most humble servant,<br/>

'SAM. JOHNSON.'<br/>
</p>

<p>'March 22nd.<br/>

'To Mr. Strahan.'<br/>
</p>

<h5>'PROPOSAL.</h5>

<p>'There is nothing more apparently wanting to the English Literature,
than a Geographical Dictionary, which, though its use is almost every day
necessary, not only to Men of Study, but of Trade or publick employment,
yet has been hitherto, not only unperformed, but almost unattempted
among us. Bohun's Dictionary, the only one which has any pretension to
regard, owes that pretension only to its bulk; for it is in all parts
contemptibly defective and is therefore deservedly forgotten. In
Collier's Dictionary, what Geography there is, can scarcely be found
among the crowd of other subjects, and when it is found, is of no great
importance. The books of Eachard and Salmon, though useful for the ends
proposed by them, are too small to be considered as anticipations of this
work, which is intended to consist of two volumes of the same size and
print with Harris's Dictionary, in which will be comprised the following
particulars:</p>

<p>'The situation of every Country with its Provinces and dependencies
according to its present state, and latest observation.</p>

<p>'The description of all remarkable Cities, Towns, Castles, Fortresses,
and places observable for their situation, products or other particulars.</p>

<p>'An account of the considerable Rivers, their Springs, Branches, Course,<br/>

Outlets, how far navigable, the Produce and Qualities of their waters.<br/>
</p>

<p>'The course of Voyages, giving directions to sailors for navigating
from one place of the World to another, with particular attention
to the Traffic of these Kingdoms.</p>

<p>'An account of all the principal Ports and Harbours of the known World,
in which will be laid down the Pilotage, Bearings, depth of water,
danger from Sands or Rocks, firmness or uncertainty of Anchorage, and
degree of safety from particular Winds.</p>

<p>'An exact account of the Commodities of each Country, both natural and
artificial.</p>

<p>'A description of the remarkable Animals in every Country, whether<br/>

Beasts, Birds or Fishes.<br/>
</p>

<p>'An account of the Buildings, whether ancient or modern, and of Ruins
or other remains of Antiquity.</p>

<p>'Remarks upon the soil, air, and waters of particular Places, their
several qualities and effects, the accidents to which every Region is
exposed, as Earthquakes and Hurricanes, and the diseases peculiar to
the Inhabitants or incident to strangers at their arrival.</p>

<p>'The political State of the World, the Government of Countries, and the<br/>

Magistracy of Cities, with their particular Laws, or Privileges.<br/>
</p>

<p>'The most probable and authentic Calculations of the number of Inhabitants
of each place.</p>

<p>'The military state of Countries, their Forces, manner of making War,<br/>

Weapons, and naval Power.<br/>
</p>

<p>'The Commercial State, extent of their Trade, Number and strength of
their Colonies, quantity of Shipping.</p>

<p>'The pretensions of Princes with their Alliances, Relations and<br/>

Genealogies.<br/>
</p>

<p>'The customs of Nations with regard to Trade, and receptions of strangers,
their domestic Customs, as Rites of Marriage and Burial. Their particular
Laws. Their habits, recreations and amusements.</p>

<p>'The religious Opinions of all Nations.</p>

<p>'These and many other heads of observation will be collected, not merely
from the Dictionaries now extant in many Languages, but from the best
Surveys, Local Histories, Voyages, and particular accounts[1], among
which care will be taken to select those of the best authority, as the
basis of the Work, and to extract from them such observations as may
best promote Knowledge and gratify Enquiry, so that it is to be hoped,
there will be few remarkable places in the known World, of which the
Politician, the Merchant, the Sailor, or the Man of Curiosity may not
find a useful and pleasing account, of the credit of which the Reader
may always judge, as the Authors from whom it is taken will be regularly
quoted, a caution which if some, who have attempted such general works,
had observed, their labours would have deserved, and found more favour
from the Publick.'</p>

<p>[Footnote 1: That this is done will appear from the authours' names
exactly quoted.]</p>

<p>This letter must have been written about the year 1753, for Bathurst
is described as a physician of about eight years' standing. He took
his degree as Bachelor of Medicine at Peterhouse, Cambridge, in 1745,
and did not, it should seem, proceed to the higher degree. In 1757
he was at the Havannah, where he died (<i>ante</i>, i. 242, n. i). He was
Johnson's beloved friend, of whom 'he hardly ever spoke without tears
in his eyes' (<i>ante</i>, i. 190, n. 2). The Proposal, I have no doubt,
was either written, or at all events revised, by Johnson. It is quite
in his style. It may be assumed that it is in Bathurst's handwriting.</p>

<h5>II.</h5>

<p><i>An apologetical letter about some work that was passing through the
press; undated, but probably written about the years 1753-5</i>.[In the
possession of Mr. Frederick Barker.]</p>

<h4>'DEAR SIR,</h4>

<p>'What you tell me I am ashamed never to have thought on—I wish I had
known it sooner—Send me back the last sheet; and the last copy for
correction. If you will promise me henceforward to print a sheet a day,
I will promise you to endeavour that you shall have every day a sheet
to print, beginning next Tuesday.</p>

<p>'I am Sir, Your most, &amp;c.</p>

<h5>'SAM. JOHNSON.'</h5>

<p>'To Mr. Strahan.'</p>

<p>In all likelihood Johnson is writing about the Dictionary. The absence
of a date, as I have already said, is strong evidence that the letter
was written comparatively early. As the first edition of the Dictionary
was in folio a sheet consisted of four pages. Johnson writing on April
3, 1753 says, 'I began the second vol. of my Dictionary, room being left
in the first for Preface, Grammar, and History, none of them yet begun'
(<i>ante</i>, i. 255). As the book was published on April 15, 1755 (<i>ante</i>,
i. 290, n. 1), the printing must have gone on very rapidly, when a
start was once made. By <i>copy</i> he means his <i>manuscript for printing</i>.</p>

<h5>III, IV.</h5>

<p><i>Two undated letters about printing the Dictionary</i>.[In the possession
of Mr. John Waller, 2, Artesian Road, Westbourne Grove.]</p>

<h5>'DEAR SIR,</h5>

<p>'I must desire you to add to your other civilities this one, to go to
Mr. Millar and represent to him the manner of going on, and inform him
that I know not how to manage. I pay three and twenty shillings a week
to my assistants, in each instance having much assistance from them,
but they tell me they shall be able to pull better in method, as indeed
I intend they shall. The Point is to get two Guineas.</p>

<p>'Sir, Your humble Servant,<br/>

'SAM. JOHNSON.'<br/>

(Address on back.) 'To Mr. Strahan.'<br/>
</p>

<h5>'SIR,</h5>

<p>'I have often suspected that it is as you say, and have told Mr. Dodsley
of it. It proceeds from the haste of the amanuensis to get to the end
of his day's work. I have desired the passages to be clipped close, and
then perhaps for two or three leaves it is done. But since poor Stuart's
time I could never get that part of the work into regularity, and
perhaps never shall. I will try to take some more care but can promise
nothing; when I am told there is a sheet or two I order it away. You
will find it sometimes close; when I make up any myself, which never
happens but when I have nobody with me, I generally clip it close, but
one cannot always be on the watch.</p>

<p>'I am Sir, Your most, &amp;c.<br/>

'SAM. JOHNSON.'<br/>
</p>

<p>These letters refer to the printing of the <i>Dictionary</i>, of which
Dodsley and Millar were two among the proprietors, and Strahan the
printer. Francis Stuart or Stewart was one of Johnson's amanuenses
(<i>ante</i>, i. 187). In 1779 Johnson paid his sister a guinea for an old
pocket-book of her brother's (<i>ante</i>, iii. 418), and wrote on April
8,1780 (<i>ante</i>, iii. 421):—'The memory of her brother is yet fresh
in my mind; he was an ingenious and worthy man.' In February 1784 he
gave her another guinea for a letter relating to himself that he had
found in the pocket-book (<i>ante</i>, iv. 262). A writer in the <i>Gent. Mag.</i>
for 1799, p. 1171, who had been employed in Strahan's printing-works,
says that 'Stewart was useful to Johnson in the explanation of low cant
phrases; all words relating to gambling and card-playing, such as
<i>All-Fours</i>, <i>Catch-honours</i> [not in Johnson's Dictionary], <i>Cribbage</i>
[merely defined as <i>A game at cards</i>], were said to be Stewart's
corrected by the Doctor.' He adds that after the printing had gone
on some time 'the proprietors of the <i>Dictionary</i> paid Johnson through
Mr. Strahan at the rate of a guinea for every sheet of MS. copy delivered.
The copy was written upon quarto post, and in two columns each page.
Johnson wrote in his own hand the words and their explanation, and
generally two or three words in each column, leaving a space between
each for the authorities, which were pasted on as they were collected
by the different amanuenses employed: and in this mode the MS. was so
regular that the sheets of MS. which made a sheet of print could be
very exactly ascertained.' The same writer states that Stewart in a
night ramble in Edinburgh with some of his drinking companions 'met with
the mob conducting Captain Porteous to be hanged; they were next day
examined about it before the Town Council, when, as Stewart used to say,
"we were found to be too drunk to have any hand in the business." He
gave an accurate account of it in the Edinburgh Magazine of that time.'</p>

<h5>V.</h5>

<p><i>A letter about Miss Williams, taxes due, and a journey; undated, but
perhaps written at Oxford in 1754</i>.[In the possession of Mr. Frederick
Barker.]</p>

<h4>'SIR,</h4>

<p>'I shall not be long here, but in the mean time if Miss Williams wants
any money pray speak to Mr. Millar and supply her, they write to me
about some taxes which I wish you would pay.</p>

<p>'My journey will come to very little beyond the satisfaction of knowing
that there is nothing to be done, and that I leave few advantages here
to those that shall come after me.</p>

<p>'I am Sir, &amp;c.</p>

<h5>'SAM. JOHNSON.'</h5>

<p>'My compliments to Mrs. Strahan.</p>

<p>To Mr. Strahan.'</p>

<p>Miss Williams came to live with Johnson after his wife's death in 1752
(<i>ante</i>, i. 232). The fact that Strahan is asked to supply her with
money after speaking to Mr. Millar seems to show that this letter was
written some time before the publication of the <i>Dictionary</i> in April
1755. Millar 'took the principal charge of conducting its publication,'
and Johnson 'had received all the copy-money, by different drafts, a
considerable time before he had finished his task' (<i>ante</i>, i. 287).</p>

<p>His 'journey' may have been his visit to Oxford in the summer of 1754.
He went there, because, 'I cannot,' he said, 'finish my book [the
Dictionary] to my mind without visiting the libraries' (<i>ante</i>, i. 270).
According to Thomas Warton 'he collected nothing in the libraries for
his <i>Dictionary</i>' (<i>ib</i> n. 5). It is perhaps to this failure that the
latter part of the letter refers, Johnson's visit, however, was one of
five weeks, while the first line of the letter shews that he intended
to be away from London but a short time.</p>

<h5>VI.</h5>

<p><i>A letter about 'Rasselas,' dated</i> Jan. 20, 1759.[In the possession of
Mr. Frederick Barker.]</p>

<p>'When I was with you last night I told you of a story which I was
preparing for the press. The title will be</p>

<p>"The Choice of Life</p>

<p>or</p>

<p>The History of … Prince of Abissinia."</p>

<p>'It will make about two volumes like little Pompadour, that is about
one middling volume. The bargain which I made with Mr. Johnson was
seventy five pounds (or guineas) a volume, and twenty five pounds for
the second edition. I will sell this either at that price or for sixty[2],
the first edition of which he shall himself fix the number, and the
property then to revert to me, or for forty pounds, and I have the
profit that is retain half the copy. I shall have occasion for thirty
pounds on Monday night when I shall deliver the book which I must
entreat you upon such delivery to procure me. I would have it offered
to Mr. Johnson, but have no doubt of selling it, on some of the terms
mentioned.</p>

<p>[Footnote 2: 'Fifty-five pounds' written first and then scored over.]</p>

<p>'I will not print my name, but expect it to be known.<br/>

I am Dear Sir, Your most humble servant,<br/>

SAM. JOHNSON.<br/>

Jan. 20, 1759.<br/>

Get me the money if you can.'<br/>
</p>

<p>This letter is of unusual interest, as it proves beyond all doubt that
<i>Rasselas</i> was written some weeks before <i>Candide</i> was published (see
<i>ante</i>, i. 342, n. a). Baretti, as I have shewn (i. 341, n. 3), says
that 'any other person with the degree of reputation Johnson then
possessed would have got £400 for the work, but he never understood
the art of making the most of his productions.' We see, however, by
this letter that Johnson did ask for a larger sum than the booksellers
allowed him. He received but one hundred pounds for the first edition,
but he had made a bargain for one hundred and fifty pounds or guineas.
Johnson, the bookseller, seems to have been but in a small way of
business as a publisher. I do not find in the <i>Gentleman's Magazine</i>
for 1758 any advertisement of books published by him, and only one in
1759 (P. 339). Cowper's publisher in 1778 was Joseph Johnson of St.
Paul's Churchyard. (Cowper's <i>Works</i> by Southey, i. 285; see also
Nichols' <i>Literary Anecdotes</i>, iii. 461-464.)</p>

<p>By 'little Pompadour' Johnson, no doubt, means the second and cheaper
edition of <i>The History of the Marchioness de Pompadour</i>. The first
edition was published by Hooper in one volume, price five shillings
(<i>Gent. Mag</i>. for October 1758, p. 493). and the second in two volumes
for three shillings and sixpence (<i>Gent. Mag</i>. for November, 1758,
p. 543).</p>

<p>Johnson did not generally 'print his name.' He published anonymously his
translation of <i>Lobos Voyage to Abyssinia; London; The Life of Savage;
The Rambler</i>, and <i>The Idler</i>, both in separate numbers and when
collected in volumes; <i>Rasselas; The False Alarm; Falkland's Islands;
The Patriot;</i>, and <i>Taxation no Tyranny</i>; (when these four pamphlets
were collected in a volume he published them with the title of <i>Political
Tracts, by the Authour of the Rambler</i>). He gave his name in <i>The Vanity
of Human Wishes, Irene</i>, the <i>Dictionary</i>, his edition of <i>Shakespeare</i>,
the <i>Journey to the Western Islands</i>, and the <i>Lives of the Poets</i>.</p>

<h5>VII.</h5>

<p><i>A letter about George Strahan's election to a scholarship at University
College, Oxford, and about William Strahan's 'affair with the University';
dated October 24, 1764</i>.[In the possession of Mr. Frederick Barker.]</p>

<h4>'SIR,</h4>

<p>'I think I have pretty well disposed of my young friend George, who, if
you approve of it, will be entered next Monday a Commoner of University
College, and will be chosen next day a Scholar of the House. The
Scholarship is a trifle, but it gives him a right, upon a vacancy, to
a Fellowship of more than sixty pounds a year if he resides, and I
suppose of more than forty if he takes a Curacy or small living. The
College is almost filled with my friends, and he will be well treated.
The Master is informed of the particular state of his education, and
thinks, what I think too, that for Greek he must get some private
assistance, which a servitour of the College is very well qualified
and will be very willing to afford him on very easy terms.</p>

<p>'I must desire your opinion of this scheme by the next post, for the
opportunity will be lost if we do not now seize it, the Scholarships
being necessarily filled up on Tuesday.</p>

<p>'I depend on your proposed allowance of a hundred a year, which must
the first year be a little enlarged because there are some extraordinary
expenses, as</p>

<p>Caution (which is allowed in his last quarter). .     7 0 0
Thirds. (He that enters upon a room pays two
thirds of the furniture that he finds, and
receives from his successor two thirds of what
he pays; so that if he pays £20 he receives
£13 6s. 8d., this perhaps may be)                    12  0 0
Fees at entrance, matriculation &amp;c., perhaps          2  0 0
His gown (I think)                                    2 10 0
                                                     ________
                                                   £ 23 10 0</p>

<p>'If you send us a Bill for about thirty pounds we shall set out
commodiously enough. You should fit him out with cloaths and linen,
and let him start fair, and it is the opinion of those whom I consult,
that with your hundred a year and the petty scholarship he may live
with great ease to himself, and credit to you.</p>

<p>'Let me hear as soon as is possible.</p>

<p>'In your affair with the university, I shall not be consulted, but I
hear nothing urged against your proposal.</p>

<p>'I am, Sir,<br/>

'Your humble servant,<br/>

'SAM. JOHNSON.'<br/>
</p>

<p>'Oct. 24, 1764.</p>

<p>'My compliments to Mrs. Strahan.</p>

<p>'To Mr. Strahan, Printer, in New Street, Shoe-lane, London.'</p>

<p>My friend, Mr. C. J. Faulkner, Fellow and Tutor of University College,
has given me the following extracts from the College records:—</p>

<p>'Oct. 30-31, 1764. Candidatis examinatis electi sunt Gulielmus Jones
et Georgius Strahan in vacuas Exhibitiones Dmi Simonis Benet Baronetti.'</p>

<p>Gulielmus Jones is the famous oriental scholar, Sir William Jones, whose
portrait adorns the Hall of his ancient College (<i>ante</i>, ii. 25, n. 2).</p>

<p>On April 16, 1767, is found the election of 'Georgium Strahan, sophistam
in perpetuum hujus Collegii Socium.'</p>

<p>He vacated his fellowship in 1773.</p>

<p>The value of a Bennet scholarship in 1764 was ten pounds a year, with
rooms added, the rent of which was reckoned as equal to two pounds more.
A fellowship on the same foundation was worth about twenty pounds, with
a yearly dividend added to it that amounted to about thirty pounds.
'Fines' (<i>ante</i>, iii. 323) and other extra payments might easily raise
the value to more than sixty pounds.</p>

<p>The 'caution' is the sum deposited by an undergraduate with the College
Bursar or Steward as a security for the payment of his 'battells' or
account. Johnson in 1728 had to pay at Pembroke College the same sum
(seven pounds) that George Strahan in 1764 had to pay at University
College. <i>Ante</i>, i. 58, n. 2.</p>

<p>Johnson wrote four letters to George Strahan, when he was a boy at
school, and one letter when he was at College. (See Croker's <i>Johnson</i>,
pp. 129, 130, 161, 168.) In this last letter, dated May 25, 1765, he
writes: 'Do not tire yourself so much with Greek one day as to be afraid
of looking on it the next; but give it a certain portion of time,
suppose four hours, and pass the rest of the day in Latin or English.
I would have you learn French, and take in a literary journal once a
month, which will accustom you to various subjects, and inform you what
learning is going forward in the world. Do not omit to mingle some
lighter books with those of more importance; that which is read <i>remisso
animo</i> is often of great use, and takes great hold of the remembrance.
However, take what course you will, if you be diligent you will be a
scholar.'</p>

<p>George Strahan attended Johnson on his death-bed, and published the
volume called <i>Prayers and Meditations composed by Samuel Johnson</i>.
<i>Ante</i>, i. 235, n. i; iv. 376, n. 4.</p>

<p>William Strahan's 'affair with the University' was very likely connected
with the lease of the University Printing House. From the 'Orders of
the Delegates of the Press,' 1758, I have been permitted to copy the
following entry, which bears a date but six days later than that of
Johnson's letter.</p>

<p>'Tuesday, Oct. 30, 1764. At a meeting of the Delegates of the Press.</p>

<p>'Ordered,</p>

<p>'That the following articles be made the foundation of the new lease
to be granted of the moiety of the Printing House; that a copy of them
be delivered to Mr. Baskett and Mr. Eyre, and that they be desired to
give in their respective proposals at a meeting to be held on Tuesday
the sixth of November.' (P. 41.)</p>

<p>The chief part of the lease consisted of the privilege to print Bibles
and Prayer Books. I conjecture that Strahan had hoped to get a share in
the lease.</p>

<h4>VIII.</h4>

<p><i>A letter about a cancel in Johnson's 'Journey to the Western Islands
of Scotland', dated Nov. 30</i>, 1774.[In the possession of Messrs. Pearson
and Co., 46, Pall Mall.]</p>

<h4>'SIR,</h4>

<p>'I waited on you this morning having forgotten your new engagement; for
this you must not reproach me, for if I had looked upon your present
station with malignity I could not have forgotten it. I came to consult
you upon a little matter that gives me some uneasiness. In one of the
pages there is a severe censure of the clergy of an English Cathedral
which I am afraid is just, but I have since recollected that from me
it may be thought improper, for the Dean did me a kindness about forty
years ago. He is now very old, and I am not young. Reproach can do
him no good, and in myself I know not whether it is zeal or wantonness.
Can a leaf be cancelled without too much trouble? tell me what I shall
do. I have no settled choice, but I would not wish to allow the charge.
To cancel it seems the surer side. Determine for me.</p>

<p>'I am, Sir, Your most humble servant,<br/>

'SAM. JOHNSON.'<br/>

'Nov. 30, 1774.<br/>
</p>

<p>'Tell me your mind: if you will cancel it I will write something to fill
up the vacuum. Please to direct to the borough.'</p>

<p>Mr. Strahan's 'new engagement' was in the House of Commons at Westminster,<br/>

to which he had been elected for the first time as member for Malmesbury.<br/>

The new Parliament had met on Nov. 29, the day before the date of<br/>

Johnson's letter (<i>Parl. Hist</i>, xviii. 23).<br/>
</p>

<p>The leaf that Johnson cancelled contained pages 47, 48 in the first
edition of his <i>Journey to the Western Islands</i>. It corresponds with
pages 19-30 in vol. ix. of Johnson's <i>Works</i> (ed. 1825), beginning
with the words 'could not enter,' and ending 'imperfect constitution.'
The excision is marked by a ridge of paper, which was left that the
revised leaf might be attached to it. Johnson describes how the lead
which covered the Cathedrals of Elgin and Aberdeen had been stripped
off by the order of the Scottish Council, and shipped to be sold in
Holland. He continues:—'Let us not however make too much haste to
despise our neighbours. Our own cathedrals are mouldering by unregarded
dilapidation. It seems to be part of the despicable philosophy of the
time to despise monuments of sacred magnificence, and we are in danger
of doing that deliberately,  which the Scots did not do but in the
unsettled state of an imperfect constitution.'</p>

<p>In the copy of the first edition in the Bodleian Library, which had
belonged to Gough the antiquary, there is written in his hand, as a
foot-note to 'neighbours': 'There is now, as I have heard, a body
of men not less decent or virtuous than the Scottish Council, longing
to melt the lead of an English Cathedral. What they shall melt, it
were just that they should swallow.' It can scarcely be doubted that
this is the suppressed passage. The English Cathedral to which Johnson
refers was, I believe, Lichfield. 'The roof,' says Harwood (History of
Lichfield, p. 75), 'was formerly covered with lead, but now with slate.'
Addenbroke, who had been Dean since 1745, was, we may assume, very old
at the time when Johnson wrote. I had at first thought it not unlikely
that it was Dr. Thomas Newton, Dean of St. Paul's and Bishop of Bristol,
who was censured. He was a Lichfield man, and was known to Johnson (see
<i>ante</i>, iv. 285, n. 3). He was, however, only seventy years old. I am
informed moreover by the Rev. W. Sparrow Simpson, the learned editor
of <i>Documents illustrating the History of St. Paul's</i>, that it is
very improbable that at this time the Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's
entertained such a thought.</p>

<p>My friend Mr. C. E. Doble has kindly furnished me with the following
curious parallel to Johnson's suppressed wish about the molten lead.</p>

<p>'The chappell of our Lady [at Wells], late repayred by Stillington,
a place of great reverence and antiquitie, was likewise defaced, and
such was their thirst after lead (I would they had drunke it scalding)
that they tooke the dead bodies of bishops out of their leaden coffins,
and cast abroad the carkases skarce throughly putrified.'—Harington's
<i>Nuga Antiquae</i>, ii. 147 (ed. 1804).</p>

<p>In the postscript Johnson says 'Please to direct to the borough.' He
was staying in Mr. Thrale's town-house in the Borough of Southwark.
(See <i>ante</i>, i, 493.)</p>

<h5>IX.</h5>

<p><i>A letter about apprenticing a lad to Mr. Strahan, and about a
presentation to the Blue Coat School, dated December 22</i>, 1774. [In
the possession of Messrs. Robson and Kerslake, 25, Coventry Street
Haymarket.]</p>

<p>'Sir,</p>

<p>'When we meet we talk, and I know not whether I always recollect what<br/>

I thought I had to say.<br/>
</p>

<p>'You will please to remember that I once asked you to receive an
apprentice, who is a scholar, and has always lived in a clergyman's
house, but who is mishapen, though I think not so as to hinder him
at the case. It will be expected that I should answer his Friend
who has hitherto maintained him, whether I can help him to a place.
He can give no money, but will be kept in cloaths.</p>

<p>'I have another request which it is perhaps not immediately in your
power to gratify. I have a presentation to beg for the blue coat
hospital. The boy is a non-freeman, and has both his parents living.
We have a presentation for a freeman which we can give in exchange.
If in your extensive acquaintance you can procure such an exchange,
it will be an act of great kindness. Do not let the matter slip out
of your mind, for though I try others I know not any body of so much
power to do it.</p>

<p>'I am, Sir, Your most humble Servant,</p>

<h5>'SAM. JOHNSON.'</h5>

<p>'Dec. 22, 1774.'</p>

<p>The apprentice was young William Davenport, the orphan son of a clergyman.<br/>

His friend was the Rev. W. Langley, the master of Ashbourne School.<br/>

Strahan received him as an apprentice (<i>ante</i>, ii. 334, n. i). See also<br/>

Nichols' <i>Literary Anecdotes</i>, vol. iii. p. 287.<br/>
</p>

<p>The 'case' is the frame containing boxes for holding type.</p>

<h4>X.</h4>

<p><i>A letter about suppressions in 'Taxation no Tyranny! dated March 1,
1775</i>.[In the possession of Mr. Frank T. Sabin, 10 &amp; 12, Garrick Street
Covent Garden.]</p>

<h4>'SIR,</h4>

<p>'I am sorry to see that all the alterations proposed are evidences of
timidity. You may be sure that I do [? not] wish to publish, what those
for whom I write do not like to have published. But print me half a
dozen copies in the original state, and lay them up for me. It concludes
well enough as it is.</p>

<p>'When you print it, if you print it, please to frank one to me here, and
frank another to Mrs. Aston at Stow Hill, Lichfield.</p>

<p>'The changes are not for the better, except where facts were mistaken.
The last paragraph was indeed rather contemptuous, there was once more
of it which I put out myself.</p>

<p>'I am Sir, Your humble Servant,<br/>

'SAM. JOHNSON.'<br/>
</p>

<p>'March 1, 1775.'</p>

<p>This letter refers to <i>Taxation no Tyranny</i>, which was published before
March 31, 1775, the date of Boswell's arrival in London (<i>ante</i>, ii.
311). Boswell says that he had in his possession 'a few proof leaves
of it marked with corrections in Johnson's own hand-writing' (ib. p.
313). Johnson, he says,' owned to me that it had been revised and
curtailed by some of those who were then in power.' When Johnson writes
'when you print it, if you print it,' he uses, doubtless, <i>print</i> in
the sense of <i>striking off copies</i>. The pamphlet was, we may assume, in
type before it was revised by 'those in power.' The corrections had been
made in the proof-sheets. Johnson asks to have six copies laid by for
him in the state in which he had wished to publish it. It seems that the
last paragraph had been struck out by the reviser, for Johnson says 'it
was rather contemptuous.' He does not think it needful to supply anything
in its place, for he says 'it concludes well enough as it is.'</p>

<p>Mr. Strahan had the right, as a member of Parliament, to frank all
letters and packets. That is to say, by merely writing his signature on
the cover he could pass them through the post free of charge. Johnson,
when he wrote to Scotland, used to employ him to frank his letters,
'that he might have the consequence of appearing a parliament-man among
his countrymen' (<i>ante</i>, iii. 364). It was to Oxford that a copy of the
pamphlet was to be franked to Johnson. That he was there at the time is
shown by a letter from him in Mrs. Piozzi's <i>Collection</i> (vol. i. p.
212), dated 'University College, Oxford, March 3, 1775.' Writing to her,
evidently from Bolt Court, on February 3, he had said: 'My pamphlet has
not gone on at all' (ib. i. 211). Mrs. Aston (or rather Miss Aston) is
mentioned <i>ante</i>, ii. 466.</p>

<h3>XI</h3>

<p><i>A letter about 'copy' and a book by Professor Watson, dated Oct. 14,
1776'</i>.[In the possession of Mr. H. Fawcett, of 14, King Street, Covent
Garden.]</p>

<h4>'SIR,</h4>

<p>'I wrote to you about ten days ago, and sent you some copy. You have
not written again, that is a sorry trick.</p>

<p>'I am told that you are printing a Book for Mr. Professor Watson of
Saint Andrews, if upon any occasion, I can give any help, or be of any
use, as formerly in Dr. Robertson's publication, I hope you will make
no scruple to call upon me, for I shall be glad of an opportunity to
show that my reception at Saint Andrews has not been forgotten.</p>

<p>'I am Sir, Your humble Servant,<br/>

'SAM. JOHNSON.'<br/>
</p>

<p>'Oct. 14, 1776.'</p>

<p>The' copy' or MS. that Johnson sent is, I conjecture, <i>Proposals for
the Rev. Mr. Shaw's Analysis of the Scotch Celtick Language</i> (<i>ante</i>,
iii. 107). This is the only acknowledged piece of writing of his during
1776. The book printing for Professor Watson was <i>History of the Reign
of Philip II</i>, which was published by Strahan and Cadell in 1777. This
letter is of unusual interest, as showing that Johnson had been of some
service as regards one of Robertson's books. It is possible that he
read some of the proof-sheets, and helped to get rid of the Scotticisms.
'Strahan,' according to Beattie, 'had corrected (as he told me himself)
the phraseology of both Mr. Hume and Dr. Robertson' (<i>ante</i>, v. 92,
n. 3). He is not unlikely, in Robertson's case, to have sought and
obtained Johnson's help.</p>

<h3>XII.</h3>

<p><i>The following letter is published in Mr. Alfred Morrison's 'Collection
of Autographs', vol. ii. p. 343.</i></p>

<p>'To Dr. TAYLOR. Dated London, April 20, 1778.'</p>

<p>'The quantity of blood taken from you appears to me not sufficient.
Thrale was almost lost by the scrupulosity of his physicians, who never
bled him copiously till they bled him in despair; he then bled till he
fainted, and the stricture or obstruction immediately gave way and from
that instant he grew better.</p>

<p>'I can now give you no advice but to keep yourself totally quiet and
amused with some gentle exercise of the mind. If a suspected letter
comes, throw it aside till your health is reestablished; keep easy and
cheerful company about you, and never try to think but at those stated
and solemn times when the thoughts are summoned to the cares of futurity,
the only cares of a rational being.</p>

<p>'As to my own health I think it rather grows better; the convulsions
which left me last year at Ashbourne have never returned, and I have by
the mercy of God very comfortable nights. Let me know very often how you
are till you are quite well.'</p>

<p>This letter, though it is dated 1778, must have been written in 1780.
Thrale's first attack was in June, 1779, when he was in 'extreme danger'
(<i>ante</i>, iii. 397, n. 2, 420). Johnson had the remission of the
convulsions on June 18, 1779. He recorded on June 18, 1780:—</p>

<p>'In the morning of this day last year I perceived the remission of
those convulsions in my breast which had distressed me for more than
twenty years. I returned thanks at church for the mercy granted me,
which has now continued a year.'—<i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, p. 183.</p>

<p>Three days later he wrote to Mrs. Thrale:—</p>

<p>'It was a twelvemonth last Sunday since the convulsions in my breast
left me. I hope I was thankful when I recollected it; by removing
that disorder a great improvement was made in the enjoyment of life.'
—<i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 163. (See <i>ante</i>, iii. 397, n. 1.)</p>

<p>He was at Ashbourne on June 18, 1779 (<i>ante</i>, iii. 453).</p>

<p>On April 20, 1778, the very day of which this letter bears the date,
he recorded:—</p>

<p>'After a good night, as I am forced to reckon, I rose seasonably….
In reviewing my time from Easter, 1777, I found a very melancholy
and shameful blank. So little has been done that days and months are
without any trace. My health has, indeed, been very much interrupted.
My nights have been commonly not only restless, but painful and fatiguing.
….Some relaxation of my breast has been procured, I think, by opium,
 which, though it never gives me sleep, frees my breast from spasms.'
—<i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, p. 169. See <i>ante</i>, iii. 317, n. 1.</p>

<p>For Johnson's advice about bleeding, see <i>ante</i>, iii. 152; and for
possible occasions for 'suspected letters,' <i>ante</i>, i. 472, n. 4;
and ii. 202, n. 2.</p>

<p><i>Mr. Mason's 'sneering observation in his "Memoirs of Mr. William
Whitehead"'</i></p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 31.)</p>

<p>I had long failed to find a copy of these <i>Memoirs</i>, though I had
searched in the Bodleian, the British Museum, and the London Library, and
had applied to the University Library at Cambridge, and the Advocates'
Library at Edinburgh. By the kindness of Mr. R. H. Soden Smith and Mr.
R. F. Sketchley, I have obtained the following extract from a copy in
the Dyce and Forster Libraries, in the South Kensington Museum:—</p>

<p>'Conscious, notwithstanding, that to avoid writing what is <i>unnecessary</i>
is, in these days, no just plea for silence in a biographer, I have some
apology to make for having strewed these pages so thinly with the
tittle-tattle of anecdote. I am, however, too proud to make this apology
to any person but my bookseller, who will be the only real loser by the
'Those readers, who believe that I do not write immediately under
his pay, and who may have gathered from what they have already read,
that I am not so passionately enamoured of Dr. Johnson's biographical
manner, as to take that for my model, have only to throw these pages
aside, and wait till they are new-written by some one of his numerous
disciples, who may follow his master's example; and should more anecdote
than I furnish him with be wanting (as was the Doctor's case in his
life of Mr. Gray), may make amends for it by those acid eructations
of vituperative criticism, which are generated by unconcocted taste and
intellectual indigestion.'—<i>Poems by William Whitehead</i>, York, 1788
(vol. iii, p. 128).</p>

<p>With this 'sneering observation,' which Boswell might surely have passed
over in silence, the Memoirs close.</p>

<p><i>Michael Johnson as a bookseller.</i></p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 36, n. 3.)</p>

<p>Mr. R. F. Sketchley kindly informs me that in the Dyce and Forster
Libraries at the South Kensington Museum there is a book with the
following title:—</p>

<p><i>S. Shaw's 'Grammatica Anglo—Romana', London, printed for Michael
Johnson, bookseller: and are to be sold at his shops in Litchfield and
Uttoxiter in Stafford-shire; and Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire,
1687.</i></p>

<p>Mr. C. E. Doble tells me that in the proposals issued in 1690 by Thomas
Bennet, St. Paul's Churchyard, for printing Anthony a Wood's <i>Athenae
Oxonienses</i> and <i>Fasti Oxonienses</i>, among 'the booksellers who take
subscriptions, give receipts, and deliver books according to the
proposals' is 'Mr. Johnson in Litchfield.'</p>

<p><i>The City and County of Lichfield</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 36, n. 4.)</p>

<p>'The City of Litchfield is a County of itself, with a jurisdiction
extending 10 or 12 miles round, which circuit the Sheriff rides every
year on Sept. 8.'—<i>A Tour through the Whole Island of Great Britain</i>,
ed. 1769, ii. 419.</p>

<p>Balliol College has a copy of this work containing David Garrick's
book-plate, with Shakespeare's head at the top of it, and the following
quotation from <i>Menagiana</i> at the foot:—</p>

<p>'<i>La première chose qu'on doit faire quand on a emprunté un livre, c'est
de le lire, afin de pouvoir le rendre plutôt' (sic)</i>.</p>

<p><i>Felixmarte of Hircania</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 49.)</p>

<p>'"He that follows is <i>Florismarte of Hyrcania</i>" said the barber. "What!
is Signor Florismarte there?" replied the priest; "in good faith he shall
share the same fate, notwithstanding his strange birth and chimerical
adventures; for his harsh and dry style will admit of no excuse. To the
yard with him, therefore." "With all my heart, dear Sir," answered the
housekeeper; "and with joyful alacrity she executed the command.'"
—<i>Don Quixote</i>, ed. 1820, i. 48.</p>

<p>Boswell speaks of <i>Felixmarte</i> as the old Spanish romance. In the
<i>Bibliografia dei Romanzi e Poeini Cavallereschi Italiani</i> (2nd ed.,
Milan, 1838), p. 351, it is stated that in the Spanish edition it is
called a translation from the Italian, and in the Italian edition a
translation from the Spanish. The Italian title is <i>Historia di Don
Florismante d'Ircania, tradotta dallo Spagnuolo</i>. Cervantes, in an
edition of <i>Don Quixote</i>, published in 1605, which I have looked at,
calls the book <i>Florismarte de Hircania</i> (not <i>Florismante</i>). It should
seem that he made his hero read the Italian version.</p>

<p><i>Palmerin of England and Don Belianis</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 49, n. 2; and vol. iii, p. 2.)</p>

<p>'"Let <i>Palmerin of England</i> be preserved," said the licentiate, "and
kept as a jewel; and let such another casket be made for it as that
which Alexander found among the spoils of Darius appropriated to preserve
the works of the poet Homer….Therefore, master Nicholas, saving your
better judgment let this and <i>Amadis de Gaul</i> be exempted from the
flames, and let all the rest perish without any farther inquiry." "Not
so neighbour," replied the barber, "for behold here the renowned
<i>Don Belianis</i>." The priest replied, "This with the second, third,
and fourth parts, wants a little rhubarb to purge away its excessive
choler; there should be removed too all that relates to the castle
of Fame, and other impertinencies of still greater consequence; let them
have the benefit, therefore, of transportation, and as they show signs
of amendment they shall hereafter be treated with mercy or justice; in
the meantime, friend, give them room in your house; but let nobody read
them."'
—<i>Don Quixote</i>, ed. 1820, i. 50.</p>

<p><i>Mr. Taylor, a Birmingham manufacturer</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 86.)</p>

<p>'John Taylor, Esq. may justly be deemed the Shakspear or Newton of
Birmingham. He rose from minute beginnings to shine in the commercial
hemisphere, as they in the poetical or philosophical. To this uncommon
genius we owe the gilt button, the japanned and gilt snuff-box, with
the numerous race of enamels; also the painted snuff-box. … He died
in 1775 at the age of 64, after acquiring a fortune of £200,000. His son
was a considerable sufferer at the time of the riots in 1791.'
—<i>A Brief History of Birmingham</i>, 1797, p. 9.</p>

<p><i>Olivia Lloyd.</i></p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 92.)</p>

<p>I am, no doubt, right in identifying Olivia Lloyd, the young quaker,
with whom Johnson was much enamoured when at Stourbridge School, with
Olive Lloyd, the daughter of the first Sampson Lloyd, of Birmingham,
and aunt of the Sampson Lloyd with whom he had an altercation (<i>ante</i>,
ii. 458 and <i>post</i>, p. liii). 'A fine likeness of her is preserved by
Thomas Lloyd, The Priory, Warwick,' as I learn from an interesting
little work called <i>Farm and its Inhabitants, with some Account of
the Lloyds of Dolobran</i>, by Rachel J. Lowe. Privately printed, 1883,
p. 24. Her elder brother married a Miss Careless; ib. p. 23. Johnson's
'first love,' Hector's sister, married a Mr. Careless (<i>ante</i>, ii. 459).</p>

<p><i>Henry Porter, of Edgbaston</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 94, n. 3.)</p>

<p>In St. Mary's Church, Warwick, is a monument to—</p>

<p>   'Anna Norton, Henrici Porter<br/>

               Filia<br/>

   Nuper de Edgberston in Com. Warw. Generosi;<br/>

   Vidua Thomae Norton….<br/>

   Haec annis et pietate matura vitam deposuit.<br/>

    Maii 14, 1698.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>A Brief Description of the Collegiate Church of St. Mary in Warwick</i>,
published by Grafton and Reddell, Birmingham; no date.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Williams's account of Mrs. Johnson and her sons by her former
marriage</i>. (Vol. i, p. 95.)</p>

<p>The following note by Malone I failed to quote in the right place. It
is copied from a paper, written by Lady Knight.</p>

<p>'Mrs. Williams's account of Mrs. Johnson was, that she had a good
understanding and great sensibility, but inclined to be satirical. Her
first husband died insolvent [this is a mistake, see <i>ante</i>, i. 95,
n. 3]; her sons were much disgusted with her for her second marriage;
… however, she always retained her affection for them. While they
[Mr. and Mrs. Johnson] resided in Gough Square, her son, the officer,
knocked at the door, and asked the maid if her mistress was at home.
She answered, "Yes, Sir, but she is sick in bed." "Oh," says he, "if
it's so, tell her that her son Jervis called to know how she did;" and
was going away. The maid begged she might run up to tell her mistress,
and, without attending his answer, left him. Mrs. Johnson, enraptured
to hear her son was below, desired the maid to tell him she longed to
embrace him. When the maid descended the gentleman was gone, and poor
Mrs. Johnson was much agitated by the adventure; it was the only time
he ever made an effort to see her. Dr. [Mr.] Johnson did all he could
to console his wife, but told Mrs. Williams: "Her son is uniformly
undutiful; so I conclude, like many other sober men, he might once in
his life be drunk, and in that fit nature got the better of his pride."'</p>

<p><i>Johnson's application for the mastership of the Grammar School at
Solihull in Warwickshire</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 96.)</p>

<p>Johnson, a few weeks after his marriage, applied for the mastership of<br/>

Solihull Grammar School, as is shown by the following letter, preserved<br/>

in the Pembroke College MSS., addressed to Mr. Walmsley, and quoted by<br/>

Mr. Croker. I failed to insert it in my notes.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>'Solihull, the 30 August 1735.</i></p>

<h5>'SIR,</h5>

<p>'I was favoured with yours of the 13th inst. in due time, but deferred
answering it til now, it takeing up some time to informe the Foeofees
of the contents thereof; and before they would return an Answer, desired
some time to make enquiry of the caracter of Mr. Johnson, who all agree
that he is an excellent scholar, and upon that account deserves much
better than to be schoolmaster of Solihull. But then he has the caracter
of being a very haughty, ill-natured gent., and that he has such a way of
distorting his Face (which though he can't help) the gent, think it
may affect some young ladds; for these two reasons he is not approved
on, the late master Mr. Crompton's huffing the Foeofees being stil in
their memory. However, we are all exstreamly obliged to you for thinking
of us, and for proposeing so good a schollar, but more especially is,
dear sir,</p>

<p>'Your very humble servant,</p>

<h5>'HENRY GRESWOLD.'</h5>

<p><i>Johnson's knowledge of Italian</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 115.)</p>

<p>Boswell says that he does not know 'at what time, or by what means
Johnson had acquired a competent knowledge of Italian.' In my note
on this I say 'he had read Petrarch "when but a boy."' As Petrarch
wrote chiefly in Latin, it is quite possible that Johnson did not
acquire his knowledge of Italian so early as I had thought.</p>

<p><i>Johnson's deference for the general opinion</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 200.)</p>

<p>Miss Burney records an interesting piece of criticism by Johnson. 'There
are,' he said, 'three distinct kinds of judges upon all new authors or
productions; the first are those who know no rules, but pronounce
entirely from their natural taste and feelings; the second are those who
know and judge by rules; and the third are those who know, but are above
the rules. These last are those you should wish to satisfy. Next to them
rate the natural judges; but ever despise those opinions that are formed
by the rules.'—<i>Mine. D'Arblay's Diary</i>, i. 180. Later on she writes:
—'The natural feelings of untaught hearers ought never to be slighted;
and Dr. Johnson has told me the same a thousand times;' ib. ii. 128.</p>

<p><i>Johnson in the Green Room</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 201.)</p>

<p>Mr. Richard Herne Shepherd, in <i>Watford's Antiquarian</i> for January,
1887, p. 34, asserts that the actual words which Johnson used when
he told Garrick that he would no longer frequent his Green Room were
indecent; so indecent that Mr. Shepherd can only venture to satisfy
those whom he calls students by informing them of them privately. For
proof of this charge against the man whose boast it was that 'obscenity
had always been repressed in his company' (<i>ante</i>, iv. 295) he brings
forward John Wilkes. The story, indeed, as it is told by Boswell, is
not too trustworthy, for he had it through Hume from Garrick. As it
reaches Mr. Shepherd it comes from Garrick through Wilkes. Garrick, no
doubt, as Johnson says (<i>ante</i>, v. 391), was, as a companion, 'restrained
by some principle,' and had 'some delicacy of feeling.' Nevertheless,
in his stories, he was, we may be sure, no more on oath than a man is
in lapidary inscriptions (<i>ante</i>, ii. 407). It is possible that he
reported  Johnson's very words to Hume, and that Hume did not change
them in reporting them to Boswell. Whatever they were, they were spoken
in 1749 and published in 1791, when Johnson had been dead six years,
Garrick twelve years, and Hume fourteen years. It is idle to dream that
they can now be conjecturally  emended. But it is worse than idle to
bring in as evidence John Wilkes. What entered his ear as purity itself
might issue from his mouth as the grossest obscenity. He had no delicacy
of feeling. No principle restrained him. When he comes to bear testimony,
and aims a shaft at any man's character, the bow that he draws is drawn
with the weakness of the hand of a worn-out and shameless profligate.</p>

<p>Mr. Shepherd quotes an unpublished letter of Boswell to Wilkes, dated
Rome, April 22, 1765, to show 'that the two men had become familiars,
not only long before Wilkes's famous meeting with Dr. Johnson was brought
about, but before even the friendship of Boswell himself with Johnson
had been consolidated.' It needs no unpublished letters to show that. It
must be known to every attentive reader of Boswell. See <i>ante</i>, i. 395,
and ii. 11.</p>

<p><i>Frederick III, King of Prussia</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 308.)</p>

<p>Boswell should have written Frederick II.</p>

<p><i>Boswell's visit to Rousseau and Voltaire</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 434; and vol. ii, p. 11.)</p>

<p><i>Boswell to Andrew Mitchell, Esq., His Britannic Majesty's
Minister at Berlin</i>.</p>

<p>'Berlin, 28 August, 1764.</p>

<p>… 'I have had another letter from my father, in which he continues of
opinion that travelling is of very little use, and may do a great deal
of harm. … I esteem and love my father, and I am determined to do what
is in my power to make him easy and happy. But you will allow that I
may endeavour to make him happy, and at the same time not to be too hard
upon myself. I must use you so much with the freedom of a friend as to
tell you that with the vivacity which you allowed me I have a melancholy
disposition. I have made excursions into the fields of amusement, perhaps
of folly. I have found that amusement and folly are beneath me, and that
without some laudable pursuit my life must be insipid and wearisome…..
My father seems much against my going to Italy, but gives me leave to go
from this, and pass some months in Paris. I own that the words of the
Apostle Paul, "I must see Rome," are strongly <i>borne in</i> upon my mind. It
would give me infinite pleasure. It would give taste for a life-time,
and I should go home to Auchinleck with serene contentment.'</p>

<p>After stating that he is going to Geneva, he continues:—</p>

<p>'I shall see Voltaire; I shall also see Switzerland and Rousseau. These
two men are to me greater objects than most statues or pictures.'
—Nichols's <i>Literary History</i>, vii. 318.</p>

<p><i>Superficiality of the French writers</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 454.)</p>

<p>Gibbon, writing of the year 1759, says:—</p>

<p>'In France, to which my ideas [in the <i>Essay on the Study of Literature</i>]
were confined, the learning and language of Greece and Rome were
neglected by a philosophic age. The guardian of those studies, the
Academy of Inscriptions, was degraded to the lowest rank among the
three royal societies of Paris; the new appellation of <i>Erudits</i> was
contemptuously applied to the successors of Lipsius and Casaubon; and
I was provoked to hear (see M. d'Alembert, <i>Discours préliminaire à
l'Encyclopedie</i>) that the exercise of the memory, their sole merit,
had been superseded by the nobler faculties of the imagination and the
judgment.'
—<i>Memoirs of Edward Gibbon</i>, ed. 1827, i. 104.</p>

<p><i>A Synod of Cooks</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 470.)</p>

<p>When Johnson spoke of 'a Synod of Cooks' he was, I conjecture, thinking
of Milton's 'Synod of Gods,' in Beelzebub's speech in Paradise Lost,
book ii. line 391.</p>

<p><i>Johnson and Bishop Percy</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 486.)</p>

<p>Bishop Percy in a letter to Boswell says: 'When in 1756 or 1757 I
became acquainted with Johnson, he told me he had lived twenty years
 in London, but not very happily.'
—Nichols's <i>Literary History</i>, vii. 307.</p>

<p><i>Barclay's Answer to Kenrick's Review of Johnson's
'Shakespeare.'</i></p>

<p>(Vol. i, p. 498.)</p>

<p>Neither in the British Museum nor in the Bodleian have I been able to
find a copy of this book. <i>A Defence of Mr. Kenricks Review</i>, 1766,
does not seem to contain any reply to such a work as Barclay's.</p>

<p><i>Mrs. Piozzi's 'Collection of Johnson s Letters.'</i></p>

<p>(Vol. ii, p. 43, n. 2.)</p>

<p>MR. BOSWELL TO BISHOP PERCY.<br/>

'Feb. 9, 1788.<br/>
</p>

<p>'I am ashamed that I have yet seven years to write of his life. … Mrs.
(Thrale) Piozzi's Collection of his letters will be out soon. … I saw
a sheet at the printing-house yesterday… It is wonderful what avidity
there still is for everything relative to  Johnson. I dined at Mr.
Malone's on Wednesday with Mr. W. G. Hamilton, Mr. Flood, Mr. Windham, Mr.
Courtenay, &amp;c.; and Mr. Hamilton observed very well what a proof it was
of Johnson's  merit that we had been talking of him all the afternoon.'
—Nichols's <i>Literary History</i>, vii. 309.</p>

<p><i>Johnson on romantic virtue</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. ii, P. 76.)</p>

<p>'Dr. Johnson used to advise his friends to be upon their guard against
romantic virtue, as being founded upon no settled principle. "A plank,"
said he, "that is tilted up at one end must of course fall down on the
other."
'—William Seward, <i>Anecdotes of Distinguished Persons</i>, ii. 461.'</p>

<p><i>'Old' Baxter on toleration</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. ii, p. 253.)</p>

<p>The Rev. John Hamilton Davies, B.A., F.R.H.S., Rector of St. Nicholas's,
Worcester, and author of <i>The Life of Richard Baxter of Kidderminster,
Preacher and Prisoner</i> (London, Kent &amp; Co., 1887), kindly informs me,
in answer to my inquiries, that he believes that Johnson may allude
to the following passage in the fourth chapter of Baxter's Reformed
Pastor:—</p>

<p>'I think the Magistrate should be the hedge of the Church. I am against
the two extremes of universal license and persecuting tyranny. The
Magistrate must be allowed the use of his reason, to know the cause,
and follow his own judgment, not punish men against it. I am the less
sorry that the Magistrate doth so little interpose.'</p>

<p><i>England barren in good historians</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. ii, p. 236, n. 2.)</p>

<p>Gibbon, writing of the year 1759, says:</p>

<p>'The old reproach that no British altars had been raised to the muse of
history was recently disproved by the first performances  of Robertson
and Hume, the histories of Scotland and of the Stuarts.'
—<i>Memoirs of Edward Gibbon</i>, ed. 1827, i. 103.</p>

<p><i>An instance of Scotch nationality</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. ii, p. 307.)</p>

<p>Lord Camden, when pressed by Dr. Berkeley (the Bishop's son) to appoint
a Scotchman to some office, replied: 'I have many years  ago sworn that
I never will introduce a Scotchman into any office; for if you introduce
one he will contrive some way or other to introduce forty more cousins
or friends.'
—G. M. <i>Berkeley's Poems</i>, p. ccclxxi.</p>

<p><i>Mortality in the Foundling Hospital of London</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. ii, p. 398.)</p>

<p>'From March 25, 1741, to December 31, 1759, the number of children
received into the Foundling Hospital is 14,994, of which have died
to December 31, 1759, 8,465.'—<i>A Tour through the Whole Island of
Great Britain</i>, ed. 1769, vol. ii, p. 121. A great many of these died,
no doubt, after they had left the Hospital.</p>

<p><i>Mr. Planta</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. ii, p. 399, n. 2.)</p>

<p>The reference is no doubt to Mr. Joseph Planta, Assistant-Librarian
of the British Museum 1773, Principal Librarian 1799-1827. See Edwards'
<i>Lives of the Founders of the British Museum</i>, pp. 517 sqq.; and
Nichols's <i>Illustrations of Literature</i>, vol. vii, pp. 677-8.</p>

<p>'<i>Unitarian</i>'.</p>

<p>(Vol. ii, p. 408, n. 1.)</p>

<p>John Locke in his <i>Second Vindication of the Reasonableness of
Christianity</i> quotes from Mr. Edwards whom he answers:—'This gentleman
and his fellows are resolved to be Unitarians; they are for one article
of faith as well as One person in the Godhead.'
—Locke's <i>Works</i>, ed. 1824, vi, 200.</p>

<p><i>The proposed Riding School for Oxford</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. ii, p. 424.)</p>

<p>My friend, Mr. C. E. Doble, has pointed out to me the following passage
in <i>Collectanea</i>, First Series, edited by Mr. C. R. L. Fletcher, Fellow
of All Souls College, and printed for the Oxford Historical Society,
Oxford, 1885.</p>

<p>'The <i>Advertisement to Religion and Policy, by Edward Earl of Clarendon</i>,
runs as follows:—</p>

<p>"Henry Viscount Cornbury, who was called up to the House of Peers
by the title of Lord Hyde, in the lifetime of his father, Henry Earl
of Rochester, by a codicil to his will, dated Aug. 10, 1751, left
divers MSS. of his great grandfather, Edward Earl of Clarendon, to
Trustees, with a direction that the money to arise from the sale or
publication thereof, should be employed as a beginning of a fund for
supporting a Manage or Academy for riding and other useful exercises
in Oxford; a plan of this sort having been also recommended by Lord
Clarendon in his Dialogue  on Education. Lord Cornbury dying before
his father, this bequest did not take effect. But Catharine, one of
the daughters of Henry Earl of Rochester, and late Duchess Dowager
of Queensbury, whose property these MSS. became, afterwards by deed
gave them, together with all the monies which had arisen or might arise
from the sale or publication of them, to [three Trustees] upon trust
for the like purposes as those expressed by Lord Hyde in his codicil."</p>

<p>'The preface to the <i>Life of Edward Earl of Clarendon, written by
himself</i>., has words to the same effect. (See also <i>Notes and Queries</i>,
Ser. I. x. 185, and xi. 32.)</p>

<p>'From a letter in <i>Notes and Queries</i>, Ser. II. x. p. 74, it appears
that in 1860 the available sum, in the hands of the Trustees of the
Clarendon Bequest, amounted to £10,000. The University no longer needed
a riding-school, and the claims of Physical Science were urgent; and in
1872 the announcement was made, that by the liberality of the Clarendon
Trustees an additional wing had been added to the University Museum,
containing the lecture-rooms and laboratories of the department of
Experimental Philosophy.' Vol. i. p. 305.</p>

<p><i>Boswell and Mrs. Rudd.</i></p>

<p>(Vol. ii, p. 450, n. 1.)</p>

<p>In Mr. Alfred Morrison's <i>Collection of Autographs</i>, vol. i. p. 103,
mention is made among Boswell's autographs of  verses entitled <i>Lurgan
Clanbrassil</i>, a supposed Irish song.'</p>

<p>I have learnt, through Mr. Morrison's kindness, that 'on the document
itself there is the following memorandum, signed, so far as can be made
out, H. W. R.:—</p>

<p>"The enclosed song was written and composed by James Boswell, the
biographer of Johnson, in commemoration of a tour he made with Mrs.
Rudd whilst she was under his protection, for living with whom he
displeased his father so much that he threatened to disinherit him.</p>

<p>"Mrs. Rudd had lived with one of the Perreaus, who were tried and
executed for forgery. She was tried at the same time and acquitted.</p>

<p>"My father having heard that Boswell used to sing this song at the Home<br/>

Circuit, requested it of him, and he wrote it and gave it him. H.W. R."'<br/>
</p>

<p>"Feb. 1828."</p>

<p>Christopher Smart.</p>

<p>(Vol. ii, p. 454, n. 3.)</p>

<p>Mr. Robert Browning, in his Parleyings with Christopher Smart, under
the similitude of 'some huge house,' thus describes the general run of
that unfortunate poet's verse:—</p>

<p>  'All showed the Golden Mean without a hint<br/>

  Of brave extravagance that breaks the rule.<br/>

  The master of the mansion was no fool<br/>

  Assuredly, no genius just as sure!<br/>

  Safe mediocrity had scorned the lure<br/>

  Of now too much and now too little cost,<br/>

  And satisfied me sight was never lost<br/>

  Of moderate design's accomplishment<br/>

  In calm completeness.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Mr. Browning goes on to liken one solitary poem to a Chapel in the house,
in which is found—</p>

<p>  'from floor to roof one evidence<br/>

  Of how far earth may rival heaven.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Parleyings with certain People of Importance in their Day</i> (pp. 80-82),
London, 1887.</p>

<p><i>Johnsons discussion on baptism—with Mr. Lloyd, the Birmingham Quaker</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. ii, p. 458.)</p>

<p>In <i>Farm and its Inhabitants</i> (<i>ante</i>, p. xlii), a further account is
given of the controversy between Johnson and Mr. Lloyd the Quaker, on
the subject of Barclay's <i>Apology</i>.</p>

<p>'Tradition states that, losing his temper, Dr. Johnson threw the volume<br/>

on the floor, and put his foot on it, in denunciation of its statements.<br/>

The identical volume is now in the possession of G. B. Lloyd, of Edgbaston<br/>

Grove.<br/>
</p>

<p>'At the dinner table he continued the debate in such angry tones, and
struck the table so violently that the children were frightened, and
desired to escape.</p>

<p>'The next morning Dr. Johnson went to the bank [Mr. Lloyd was a banker]
and by way of apology called out in his stentorian voice, "I say, Lloyd,
I'm the best theologian, but you are the best Christian.'" p. 41. It
could not have been 'the next morning' that Johnson went to the bank,
for he left for Lichfield on the evening of the day of the controversy
(<i>ante</i>, ii. 461). He must have gone in the afternoon, while Boswell
was away seeing Mr. Boulton's great works at Soho (ib. p. 459).</p>

<p>Mr. G. B. Lloyd, the great-grandson of Johnson's host, in a letter
written this summer (1886), says: 'Having spent much of my boyhood
with my grandfather in the old house, I have heard him tell the story
of the stamping on the broad volume.'</p>

<p>Boswell mentions (ib. p. 457) that 'Mr. and Mrs. Lloyd, like their
Majesties, had been blessed with a numerous family of fine children,
their numbers being exactly the same.' The author of <i>Farm and its
Inhabitants</i> says (p. 46): 'There is a tradition that when Sampson
Lloyd's wife used to feel depressed by the care of such a large family
(they had sixteen children) he would say to her, "Never mind, the
twentieth will be the most welcome."' His fifteenth child Catharine
married Dr. George Birkbeck, the founder of the Mechanics' Institutes
(ib. p. 48).</p>

<p>A story told (p. 50) of one of Mr. Lloyd's sons-in-law, Joseph Biddle,
is an instance of that excess of forgetfulness which Johnson called
'morbid oblivion' (<i>ante</i>, v. 68). 'He went to pay a call in Leamington.
The servant asked him for his name, he could not remember it; in
perplexity he went away, when a friend in the street met him and
accosted him, "How do you do, Mr. Biddle?" "Oh, Biddle, Biddle, Biddle,
that's the name," cried he, and rushed off to pay his call.'</p>

<p>The editor is in error in stating (p. 45, n. 1) that a very poor poem
entitled <i>A bone for Friend Mary to pick</i>, is by Johnson. It may be
found in the <i>Gent. Mag.</i> for 1791, p. 948.</p>

<p><i>Lichfield in 1783.</i></p>

<p>(Vol. ii, p. 461.)</p>

<p>C. P. Moritz, a young Prussian clergyman who published an account of
a pedestrian tour that he made in England in the year 1782, thus describes
Lichfield as he saw it on a day in June:—</p>

<p>'At noon I got to Lichfield, an old-fashioned town with narrow dirty
streets, where for the first time I saw round panes of glass in the
windows. The place to me wore an unfriendly appearance; I therefore
made no use of my recommendation, but went straight through and only
bought some bread at a baker's, which I took along with me.'—<i>Travels
in England in 1782</i>, p. 140, by C. P. Moritz. Cassell's National Library,
1886.</p>

<p>The 'recommendation' was an introduction to an inn given him by the
daughter of his landlord at Sutton, who told him 'that the people in
Lichfield were, in general, very proud.' Travelling as he did, on foot
and without luggage, he was looked upon with suspicion at the inns,
and often rudely refused lodging.</p>

<p><i>Richard Baxter's doubt</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. ii, p. 477.)</p>

<p>The Rev. J. Hamilton Davies [See <i>ante</i>, p. xlix. 1] informs me that
there can be no doubt that Johnson referred to the following passage
in <i>Reliquiae Baxterianae</i>, folio edition of 1696, p. 127:—</p>

<p>'This is another thing which I am changed in; that whereas in my
younger days I was never tempted to doubt of the Truth of Scripture
or Christianity, but all my Doubts and Fears were exercised at home,
about my own Sincerity and Interest in Christ—since then my sorest
assaults have been on the other side, and such they were, that had I
been void of internal Experience, and the adhesion of Love, and the
special help of God, and had not discerned more Reason for my Religion
than I did when I was younger, I had certainly apostatized to Infidelity,'
&amp;c.</p>

<p>Johnson, the day after he recorded his 'doubt,' wrote that he was
'troubled with Baxter's <i>scruple</i>' (<i>ante</i>, ii. 477). The 'scruple'
was, perhaps, the same as the 'doubt.' In his <i>Dictionary</i> he defines
<i>scruple</i> as <i>doubt; difficulty of determination; perplexity; generally
about minute things</i>.</p>

<p><i>Oxford in 1782</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. iii, p. 13, n. 3.)</p>

<p>The Rev. C. P. Moritz (<i>ante</i>, p. liv) gives a curious account of
his visit to Oxford. On his way from Dorchester on the evening of
a Sunday in June, he had been overtaken by the Rev. Mr. Maud, who seems
to have been a Fellow and Tutor of Corpus College[3], and who was
returning from doing duty in his curacy. It was late when they arrived
in the town. Moritz, who, as I have said, more than once had found
great difficulty in getting a bed, had made up his mind to pass the
summer night on a stonebench in the High Street. His comrade would not
hear of this, but said that he would take him to an ale-house where
'it is possible they mayn't be gone to bed, and we may yet find company.'
This ale-house was the Mitre.</p>

<p>'We went on a few houses further, and then knocked at a door. It was
then nearly twelve. They readily let us in; but how great was my
astonishment when, on being shown into a room on the left, I saw
a great number of clergymen, all with their gowns and bands on, sitting
round a large table, each with his pot of beer before him. My travelling
companion introduced me to them as a German clergyman, whom he could not
sufficiently praise for my correct pronunciation of the Latin, my
orthodoxy, and my good walking.</p>

<p>'I now saw myself in a moment, as it were, all at once transported
into the midst of a company, all apparently very respectable men, but
all strangers to me. And it appeared to me extraordinary that I should
thus at midnight be in Oxford, in a large company of Oxonian clergy,
without well knowing how I had got there. Meanwhile, however, I took
all the pains in my power to recommend myself to my company, and in the
course of conversation I gave them as good an account as I could of
our German universities, neither denying nor concealing that now and
then we had riots and disturbances. "Oh, we are very unruly here,
too," said one of the clergymen, as he took a hearty draught out of his
pot of beer, and knocked on the table with his hand. The conversation
now became louder, more general, and a little confused. … At last,
when morning drew near, Mr. Maud suddenly exclaimed, "D-n me, I must
read prayers this morning at All Souls!" "D-n me" is an abbreviation
of "G-d d-n me," which in England does not seem to mean more mischief
or harm than any of our or their common expletives in conversation,
such as "O gemini!" or "The deuce take me!" … I am almost ashamed
to own, that next morning, when I awoke, I had got so dreadful a
headache from the copious and numerous toasts of my jolly and reverend
friends that I could not possibly get up.
—<i>Travels in England in 1782</i>, by C. P. Moritz, p. 123.</p>

<p>[Footnote 3: No such person appears in the <i>Catalogue of Graduates</i>.]</p>

<p><i>Dr. Lettsom</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. in, p. 68.)</p>

<p>Boswell in an <i>Ode to Mr. Charles Dilly</i>, published in the <i>Gent.
Mag.</i> for 1791, p. 367, says that Dr. Lettsom 'Refutes pert Priestley's
nonsense.'</p>

<p><i>William Vachell</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. iii, p. 83, n. 3.)</p>

<p>Mr. George Parker of the Bodleian Library informs me that William
Vachell had been tutor to Prince Esterhazy, and that for many years
he held the appointment of 'Pumper,' or Lessee of the baths at Bath.
In 1776 and 1777 he paid as rental for them to the Corporation £525.
He died on November 26, 1789. According to Mr. Ivor Vachell (<i>Notes
and Queries</i>, 6th S. vii. 327), it was his eldest son who signed the
Round Robin.</p>

<p><i>Johnson and Baretti</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. iii, p. 96, n. 1.)</p>

<p>Baretti in his <i>Tolondron</i>, p. 145, gives an account of a difference
between himself and Johnson. Johnson sent to ask him to call on him,
but Baretti was leaving town. When he returned the time for a
reconciliation had passed, for Johnson was dead.</p>

<p><i>English pulpit eloquence</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. iii, p. 248.)</p>

<p>'Upon the whole, which is preferable, the philosophic method of the
English, or the rhetoric of the French preachers? The first (though
less glorious) is certainly safer for the preacher. It is difficult
for a man to make himself ridiculous, who proposes only to deliver
plain sense on a subject he has thoroughly studied. But the instant
he discovers the least pretensions towards the sublime or the pathetic,
there is no medium; we must either admire or laugh; and there are so
many various talents requisite to form the character of an orator that
it is more than probable we shall laugh.'
—<i>Memoirs of Edward Gibbon</i>, ed. 1827, i. 118.</p>

<p><i>Bishop Percy's communications to Boswell relative to Johnson</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. iii, p. 278, n. 1.)</p>

<h5>'JAMES BOSWELL TO BISHOP PERCY.</h5>

<p>"9 April, 1790.</p>

<p>"As to suppressing your Lordship's name when relating the very few
anecdotes of Johnson with which you have favoured me, I will do anything
to oblige your Lordship but that very thing. I owe to the authenticity
of my work, to its respectability,  and to the credit of my illustrious
friends [? friend] to introduce as many names of eminent persons as I
can… Believe me, my Lord, you are not the only bishop in the number
of great men with which my pages are graced. I am quite resolute as to
this matter."
'—Nichols's <i>Literary History</i>, vii. 313.</p>

<p><i>Sir Thomas Brown's remark 'Do the devils lie? No; for then Hell could
not subsist.</i>'</p>

<p>(Vol. iii, p. 293.)</p>

<p>This remark, whether it is Brown's or not, may have been suggested by
Milton's lines in <i>Paradise Lost</i>, ii. 496-9, or might have suggested
them:—</p>

<p>  'O shame to men! devil with devil damn'd<br/>

  Firm concord holds, men only disagree<br/>

  Of creatures rational.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Johnson on the advantages of having a profession or business</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. iii, p. 309, n. 1.)</p>

<p>'Dr. Johnson was of opinion that the happiest as well as the most
virtuous persons were to be found amongst those who united with a
business or profession a love of literature.'
—Seward's <i>Biographiana</i>, p. 599.</p>

<p><i>Johnson's trips to the country</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. iii, p. 453.)</p>

<p>I have omitted to mention Johnson's visit to 'Squire Dilly's mansion
at Southill in June, 1781 (<i>ante</i>, iv. 118-132).</p>

<p><i>Citations of living authors in Johnson's Dictionary</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. iv, p. 4, n. 3.)</p>

<p>Johnson cites <i>Irene</i> under <i>impostures</i>, and Lord Lyttelton under
<i>twist</i>.</p>

<p><i>Dr. Parrs evening with Dr. Johnson</i>.
(Vol. iv, p. 15.)</p>

<p>The Rev. John Rigaud, B.D., Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, has
kindly sent me the following anecdote of the meeting of Johnson and
Parr:—</p>

<p>'I remember Dr. Routh, the old President of Magdalen, telling me of an
interview and conversation between Dr. Johnson and Dr. Parr, in the
course of which the former made use of some expression respecting the
latter, which considerably wounded and offended him. "Sir," he said
to Dr. Johnson, "you know that what you have just said will be known
in four-and-twenty hours over this vast metropolis." Upon which Dr.
Johnson's manner altered, his eye became calm, and he put out his hand,
and said, "Forgive me, Parr, I didn't quite mean it." "But," said the
President, with an amused and amusing look, "<i>I never could get him to
tell me what it was Dr. Johnson had said!</i>" He spoke of seeing Dr.
Johnson going up the steps into University College, dressed, I think,
in a snuff-coloured coat.'</p>

<p>Dr. Martin Joseph Routh, who was President of Magdalen College for
sixty-four years, was born in 1755 and died on December 22, 1854.</p>

<p>'<i>Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris</i>.'</p>

<p>(Vol. iv, p. 181, n. 3.)</p>

<p>Malone's note on <i>The Rape of Lucrece</i> must have been, not as I
conjectured on line 1111, but on lines 1581-2:—</p>

<p>  'It easeth some, though none it ever cured,<br/>

  To think their dolour others have endured.'<br/>
</p>

<p>With these lines may be compared Satan's speech in <i>Paradise Regained</i>,<br/>

Book i, lines 399-402:—<br/>
</p>

<p>  'Long since with woe<br/>

  Nearer acquainted, now I feel by proof,<br/>

  That fellowship in pain divides not smart,<br/>

  Nor lightens aught each man's peculiar load.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Richard Baxter's rule of preaching</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. iv, p. 185.)</p>

<p>The Rev. J. Hamilton Davies [See <i>ante</i>, p. xlix.] has furnished me
with the following extract from <i>Reliquiae Baxterianae</i>, ed. 1696, p. 93,
in illustration of Johnson's statement:—</p>

<p>'And yet I did usually put in something in my Sermon which was above
their own discovery, and which they had not known before; and this I
did, that they might be kept humble, and still perceive their ignorance,
and be willing to keep in a learning state. (For when Preachers tell
their People of no more than they know, and do not shew that they excel
them in knowledge, and easily overtop them in Abilities, the People
will be tempted to turn Preachers themselves, and think that they have
learnt all that the Ministers can teach them, and are as wise as
they———). And this I did also to increase their knowledge; and
also to make Religion pleasant to them, by a daily addition to their
former Sight, and to draw them on with desire and Delight.'</p>

<p><i>Opposition to Sir Joshua Reynolds in the Royal Academy</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. iv, p. 219, n. 4.)</p>

<p>'JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ., TO BISHOP PERCY.
'12 March, 1790.</p>

<p>'Sir Joshua has been shamefully used by a junto of the Academicians.<br/>

I live a great deal with him, and he is much better than you would<br/>

suppose.'<br/>

—Nichols's <i>Literary History</i>, vii. 313.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Richard Baxter on the possible salvation of a Suicide</i>.
(Vol. iv, p. 225.)</p>

<p>The Rev. J. Hamilton Davies writes to me that 'Dr. Johnson's quotation
about suicide must surely be wrong. I have no recollection in any of
Baxter's <i>Works</i> of such a statement, and it is in direct contradiction
to all that is known of his sentiments. 'Mr. Davies sends me the following
passage, which possibly Johnson might have very imperfectly remembered:—</p>

<p>'The commonest cause [of suicide] is melancholy, &amp;c. Though there
be much more hope of the salvation of such as want the use of their
understandings, because so far it may be called involuntary, yet it
is a very dreadful case, especially so far as reason remaineth in any
power.'
—Baxter's _Christian Directory, edited by Orme, part iv, p. 138.</p>

<p><i>Haslitt's report of Baxter's Sermon</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. iv, p. 226, n. 2.)</p>

<p>The Rev. J. Hamilton Davies tells me that he 'entirely disbelieves that
Baxter said, "Hell was paved with infants' skulls." The same thing, or
something very like it, has been said of Calvin, but I could never,'
Mr. Davies continues, 'find it in his Works.' He kindly sends me the
following extract from <i>Reliquiae Baxterianae</i>, ed. 1696, p. 24:—</p>

<p>'Once all the ignorant Rout were raging mad against me for preaching
the Doctrine of Original Sin to them, and telling them that Infants
before Regeneration had so much Guilt and Corruption, as made them
loathsome in the Eyes of God: whereupon they vented it abroad in the
Country, That I preached that God hated, or loathed Infants; so that
they railed at me as I passed through the streets. The next Lord's Day,
I cleared and confirmed it, and shewed them that if this were not true,
their Infants had no need of Christ, of Baptism, or of Renewing by the
Holy Ghost. And I asked them whether they durst say that their Children
were saved without a Saviour, and were no Christians, and why they
baptized them, with much more to that purpose, and afterwards they
were ashamed and as mute as fishes.'</p>

<p><i>Johnson on an actor's transformation</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. iv, p. 244.)</p>

<p>Boswell in his <i>Remarks on the Profession of a Player</i> (Essay ii),
first printed in the <i>London Magazine</i> for 1770, says:—</p>

<p>'I remember to have heard the most illustrious authour of this age say:
"If, Sir, Garrick believes himself to be every character that he
represents he is a madman, and ought to be confined. Nay, Sir, he is a
villain, and ought to be hanged. If, for instance, he believes himself
to be Macbeth he has committed murder, he is a vile assassin who, in
violation of the laws of hospitality as well as of other principles,
has imbrued his hands in the blood of his King while he was sleeping
under his roof. If, Sir, he has really been that person in his own mind,
he has in his own mind been as guilty as Macbeth."
'—Nichols's <i>Literary History</i>, ed. 1848, vii. 373.</p>

<p><i>Sir John Flayer 'On the Asthma</i>.'</p>

<p>(Vol. iv, p. 353.)</p>

<p>Johnson, writing from Ashbourne to Dr. Brocklesby on July 20, 1784, says:
'I am now looking into Floyer who lived with his asthma to almost his
ninetieth year.' Mr. Samuel Timmins, the author of <i>Dr. Johnson in
Birmingham</i>, informs me that he and two friends of his lately found
in Lichfield a Lending Book of the Cathedral Library. Among the entries
for 1784 was: '<i>Sir John Floyer on the Asthma</i>, lent to Dr. Johnson.'
Johnson, no doubt, had taken the book with him to Ashbourne.</p>

<p>Mr. Timmins says that the entries in this Lending Book unfortunately
do not begin till about 1760 (or later). 'If,' he adds, 'the earlier
Lending Book could be found, it would form a valuable clue to books
which Johnson may have borrowed in his youth and early manhood.'</p>

<p><i>Boswell's expectations from Burke</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. iv, p. 223, n. 2; and p. 258, n. 2.)</p>

<p>Boswell, in May 1783, mentioned to Johnson his 'expectations from the
interest of an eminent person then in power.' The two following extracts
from letters written by him show what some of these expectations had been.</p>

<p>'JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ. TO JAMES ABERCROMBIE, ESQ., of Philadelphia.<br/>

'July 28,1793.<br/>
</p>

<p>'I have a great wish to see America; and I once flattered myself that<br/>

I should be sent thither in a station of some importance.'<br/>

Nichols's <i>Literary History</i>, vii. 317.<br/>
</p>

<p>Boswell had written to Burke on March 3, 1778: 'Most heartily do I
rejoice that our present ministers have at last yielded to conciliation
(<i>ante</i>, iii. 221). For amidst all the sanguinary zeal of my countrymen,
I have professed myself a friend to our fellow-subjects in America, so
far as they claim an exemption from being taxed by the representatives
of the King's  British subjects. I do not perfectly agree with you; for I
deny the declaratory act, and I am a warm Tory in its true constitutional
sense. I wish I were a commissioner, or one of the secretaries of the
commission for the grand treaty. I am to be in London this spring, and
if his Majesty should ask me what I would choose, my answer will be to
assist at the compact between Britain and America.'
—<i>Burke's Correspondence</i>, ii. 209.</p>

<p><i>Boswelf's intention to attend on Johnson in his illness, and to publish
'Praises' of him.</i></p>

<p>(Vol. iv, p. 265.)</p>

<h5>'JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ., TO BISHOP PERCY.</h5>

<p>'Edinburgh, 8 March, 1784.</p>

<p>"…I intend to be in London about the end of this month, chiefly to
attend upon Dr. Johnson with respectful affection. He has for some time
been very ill…I wish to publish as a regale [<i>ante</i>, iii. 308, n. 2;
v. 347, n. 1] to him a neat little volume, <i>The Praises  of Dr. Johnson,
by contemporary Writers</i>. …Will your Lordship take the trouble to
send me a note of the writers you recollect having praised our much
respected friend?…An edition of my pamphlet [<i>ante</i>, iv. 258] has been
published in London."'
—Nichols's <i>Literary History</i>, vii. 302.</p>

<p><i>The reported Russian version of the 'Rambler'</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. iv, p. 277, n. 1.)</p>

<p>I am informed by my friend, Mr. W. R. Morfill, M.A., of Oriel College,
Oxford, who has, I suppose, no rival in this country in his knowledge of
the Slavonic tongues, that no Russian translation of the Rambler has
been published. He has given me the following title of the Russian
version of <i>Rasselas</i>, which he has obtained for me through the kindness
of Professor Grote, of the University of Warsaw:—</p>

<p>'Rasselas, printz Abissinskii, Vostochnaya Poviest Sochinenie Doktora<br/>

Dzhonsona Perevod s'angliiskago. 3 chasti, Moskva. 1795.<br/>
</p>

<p>'Rasselas, prince of Abyssinia, An Eastern Tale, by Doctor Johnson.<br/>

Translated from the English. 2 parts, Moscow, 1795.'<br/>
</p>

<p>'<i>It has not wit enough to keep it sweet</i>.'</p>

<p>(Vol. iv, p. 320.)</p>

<p>'Heylyn, in the Epistle to his <i>Letter-Combate</i>, addressing Baxter,
and speaking of such "unsavoury pieces of wit and mischief" as "the
<i>Church-historian</i>" asks, "Would you not have me rub them with a little
salt to keep them sweet?" This passage was surely present in the mind
of Dr. Johnson when he said concerning <i>The Rehearsal</i> that "it had not
wit enough to keep it sweet."'
—J. E. Bailey's <i>Life of Thomas Fuller</i>, p. 640.</p>

<p><i>Pictures of Johnson</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. iv, p. 421, n. 2.)</p>

<p>In the Common Room of Trinity College, Oxford, there is an interesting
portrait of Johnson, said to be by Romney. I cannot, however, find
any mention of it in the <i>Life</i> of that artist. It was presented to
the College by Canon Duckworth.</p>

<p><i>The Gregory Family</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 48, n. 3.)</p>

<p>Mr. P. J. Anderson (in <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 7th S. iii. 147) casts some
doubt on Chalmers' statement. He gives a genealogical table of the
Gregory family, which includes thirteen professors; but two of these
cannot, from their dates, be reckoned among Chalmers' sixteen.</p>

<p><i>The University of St. Andrews in 1778</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 63, n. 2.)</p>

<p>In the preface to <i>Poems by George Monck Berkeley</i>, it is recorded
(p. cccxlviii) that when 'Mr. Berkeley entered at the University of
St. Andrews [about 1778], one of the college officers called upon him
to deposit a crown to pay for the windows he might break. Mr. Berkeley
said, that as he should reside in his father's house, it was little
likely he should break any windows, having never, that he remembered,
broke one in his life. He was assured that he <i>would</i> do it at St.
Andrews. On the rising of the session several of the students said, "Now
for the windows. Come, it is time to set off, let us sally forth!"
Mr. Berkeley, being called upon, enquired what was to be done? They
replied, "Why, to break every window in college." "For what reason?"
"Oh! no reason; but that it has always been done from time immemorial."'
The Editor goes on to say that Mr. Berkeley prevailed on them to give
up the practice. How poor some of the students were is shown by the
following anecdote, told by the College Porter, who had to collect the
crowns. 'I am just come,' he said, 'from a poor student indeed. I went
for the window <i>croon</i>; he cried, begged, and prayed not to pay it,
saying, "he brought but a croon to keep him all the session, and he
had spent sixpence of it; so I have got only four and sixpence."' His
father, a labourer, who owned three cows, 'had sold one to dress his
son for the University, and put the lamented croon in his pocket to
purchase coals. All the lower students study by fire-light. He had
brought with him a large tub of oatmeal and a pot of salted butter, on
which he was to subsist from Oct. 20 until May 20.' Berkeley raised
'a very noble subscription' for the poor fellow.</p>

<p>In another passage (p. cxcviii) it is recorded that Berkeley 'boasted to
his father, "Well, Sir, idle as you may think me, I never have once
bowed at any Professor's Lecture." An explanation being requested of
the word <i>bowing</i>, it was thus given: "Why, if any poor fellow has
been a little idle, and is not prepared to speak when called upon by
the Professor, he gets up and makes a respectful-bow, and sits down
again."' Berkeley was a grandson of Bishop Berkeley.</p>

<p><i>Johnson's unpublished sermons</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 67, n. i.)</p>

<p>'JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ., TO JAMES ABERCROMBIE, ESQ., of Philadelphia.</p>

<p>'June 11, 1792.</p>

<p>"I have not yet been able to discover any more of Johnson's sermons
besides those left for publication by Dr. Taylor. I am informed by the
Lord Bishop of Salisbury, that he gave an excellent one to a clergyman,
who preached and published it in his own name on some public occasion.
But the Bishop has not as yet told me the name, and seems unwilling to
do it. Yet I flatter myself I shall get at it."'
—Nichols's <i>Literary History</i>, vii. 315.</p>

<p><i>Tillotson's argument against the doctrine of transubstantiation.</i></p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 71.)</p>

<p>Gibbon, writing of his reconversion from Roman Catholicism to
Protestantism in the year 1754, after allowing something to the
conversation of his Swiss tutor, says:—</p>

<p>'I must observe that it was principally effected by my private
reflections; and I  still remember my solitary transport at the discovery
of a philosophical argument against the doctrine of transubstantiation—
<i>that</i> the text of scripture which seems to inculcate the real presence
is attested only by a single sense— our sight; while the real presence
itself is disproved by three of our senses—the sight, the touch, and
the taste.'
—<i>Memoirs of Edward Gibbon</i>, ed. 1827, i. 67.</p>

<p><i>Jean Pierre de Crousaz</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 80.)</p>

<p>Gibbon, describing his education at Lausanne, says:—'The principles
of philosophy were associated with the examples of taste; and by a
singular chance the book as well as the man which contributed the most
effectually to my education has a stronger claim on my gratitude than
on my admiration. M. de Crousaz, the adversary of Bayle and Pope, is not
distinguished by lively fancy or profound reflection; and even in his
own country, at the end of a few years, his name and writings are almost
obliterated. But his philosophy had been formed in the school of Locke,
his divinity in that of Limborch and Le Clerc; in a long and laborious
life several generations of pupils were taught to think and even to
write; his lessons rescued the Academy of Lausanne from Calvinistic
prejudice; and he had the rare merit of diffusing a more liberal spirit
among the clergy and people of the Pays de Vaud.'
—<i>Memoirs of Edward Gibbon</i>, ed. 1827, i. 66.</p>

<p><i>The new pavement in London.</i></p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 84, n. 3.)</p>

<p>'By an Act passed in 1766, <i>For the better cleansing, paving, and
enlightning the City of London and Liberties thereof</i>, &amp;c., powers
are granted in pursuance of which the great streets have been paved
with whyn-quarry stone, or rock-stone, or stone of a flat surface.'
—<i>A Tour through the whole Island of Great Britain</i>, ed. 1769,
vol. ii, p. 121.</p>

<p><i>Boswell's Projected Works.</i></p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 91, n. 2.)</p>

<p>To this list should be added an account of a Tour to the Isle of Man
(<i>ante</i>, iii. 80).</p>

<p><i>A cancel in the first edition of Boswell's 'Journal of a Tour to the
Hebrides</i>.'</p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 151.)</p>

<p>In my note on the suppression of offensive passages in the second edition
of Boswell's <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i> (<i>ante</i>, v. 148), I
mention that Rowlandson in one of his  <i>Caricatures</i> paints Boswell
begging Sir Alexander Macdonald for mercy, while on the ground lie
pages 165, 167, torn out. I have discovered, though too late to mention
in the proper place, that in the first edition the leaf containing pages
167, 168, was really cancelled. In my own copy I noticed between pages 168
and 169 a narrow projecting slip of paper. I found the same in the copy
in the British Museum. Mr. Horace Hart, the printer to the University,
who has kindly examined my copy, informs me that the leaf was cancelled
after the sheets had been stitched together. It was cut out, but an edge
was left to which the new one was attached by paste. The leaf thus
treated begins with the words 'talked with very high respect' (<i>ante</i>,
v. 149) and ends 'This day was little better than a blank' (<i>ante</i>,
v. 151). This conclusion was perhaps meant to be significant to the
observant reader.</p>

<p><i>Boswell's conversation with the King about the title proper to be
given to the Young Pretender.</i></p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 185, n. 4.)</p>

<p>Dr. Lort wrote to Bishop Percy on Aug. 15, 1785:—</p>

<p>'Boswell's book [<i>The Tour to the Hebrides</i>], I suppose, will be out
in the winter. The King at his levée talked to him, as was natural, on
this subject. Boswell told his majesty that he had another work on the
anvil—a <i>History of the Rebellion in</i> 1745 (<i>ante</i>, iii. 162); but
that he was at a loss how to style the  principal person who figured
in it. "How would you style him, Mr. Boswell?" "I was thinking, Sire,
of calling him the grandson of the unfortunate James the Second." "That
I have no objection  to; my title to the Crown stands on firmer ground
—on an Act of Parliament." This is said to be the <i>substance</i> of a
conversation which passed at the levée. I wish I was certain of the
exact words.'
—Nichols's <i>Literary History</i>, vii. 472.</p>

<p><i>Shakespeare's popularity</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 244, n. 2.)</p>

<p>Gibbon, after describing how he used to attend Voltaire's private theatre
at Monrepos in 1757 and 1758, continues:—</p>

<p>'The habits of pleasure fortified my taste for the French theatre, and
that taste has perhaps abated my idolatry for the gigantic genius of
Shakespeare, which is inculcated from our infancy as the first duty of
an Englishman.'
—<i>Memoirs of Edward Gibbon</i>, ed. 1837, i. 90.</p>

<p><i>Archibald Campbell</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 357.)</p>

<p>Mr. C. E. Doble informs me that in the Bodleian Library 'there is a
characteristic letter of Archibald Campbell in a <i>Life of Francis
Lee</i> in Rawlinson, J., 4to. 2. 197; and also a skeleton life of him
in Rawlinson, J., 4to. 5. 301.'</p>

<p><i>Cocoa Tree Club.</i></p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 386, n. 1.)</p>

<p>Gibbon records in his Journal on November 24, 1762, a visit to the Cocoa<br/>

Tree Club:—<br/>
</p>

<p>'That respectable body, of which I have the honour of being a member,
affords every evening a sight truly English. Twenty or thirty, perhaps,
of the first men in the kingdom in point of fashion and fortune, supping
at little tables covered with a napkin, in the middle of a coffee-room,
upon a bit of cold meat or a sandwich, and drinking a glass of punch.
At present we are full of king's counsellors and lords of the bed-chamber,
who, having jumped into the ministry, make a very singular medley
of their old principles and language with their modern ones.'
—<i>Memoirs of Edward Gibbon</i>, ed. 1827, i. 131.</p>

<p><i>Johnson's use of the word 'big'</i>.</p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 425.)</p>

<p>On volume i, page 471, Johnson says: 'Don't, Sir, accustom yourself to
use big words for little matters.'</p>

<p><i>Atlas, the Duke of Devonshire's race-horse.</i></p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 429.)</p>

<p>Johnson, in his <i>Diary of a Journey into North Wales</i>, records on<br/>

July 12, 1774:—<br/>
</p>

<p>'At Chatsworth…, Atlas, fifteen hands inch and half.'</p>

<p>Mr. Duppa in a note on this, says: 'A race-horse, which attracted so
much of Dr. Johnson's attention, that he said, "of all the Duke's
possessions I like Atlas best."'</p>

<p>Thomas Holcroft, who in childhood wandered far and wide with his father,
a pedlar, was at Nottingham during the race-week  of the year 1756 or
1757, and saw in its youth the horse which Johnson so much admired in
its old age. He says: 'The great and glorious part which Nottingham held
in the annals of racing this year, arose from the prize of the King's
plate, which was to be contended for by the two horses which everybody
I heard speak considered as undoubtedly the best in England, and perhaps
 equal to any that had ever been known, Childers alone excepted. Their
names were Careless and Atlas…..There was a story in circulation that
Atlas, on account of his size and clumsiness, had been banished to the
cart-breed; till by some accident, either of playfulness or fright,
several of them started together; and his vast advantage in speed
happening to be noticed, he was restored to his blood companions…..Alas
for the men of Nottingham, Careless was conquered. I forget whether it
was at two or three heats, but there was many an empty purse on that
night, and many a sorrowful heart.'
—<i>Memoirs of Thomas Holcroft</i>, i. 70.</p>

<p>Sir Richard Clough.</p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 436.)</p>

<p>There is an interesting note on Sir Richard Clough, the founder of Bâch
y Graig, in Professor Rhys's edition of Pennant's <i>Tours in Wales</i>
(vol. ii, p. 137). The Professor writes to me:—</p>

<p>'Sir Richard Clough's wealth was so great that it became a saying of the
people in North Wales that a man who grew very wealthy was or had become
a Clough. This has long been forgotten; but it is still said in Welsh,
in North Wales, that a very rich man is a regular <i>clwch</i>, which is
pronounced with the guttural spirant, which was then (in the 16th
century) sounded in English, just as the English word <i>draught</i> (of
drink) is in Welsh <i>dracht</i> pronounced nearly as if it were German.'</p>

<p><i>Evan Evans.</i></p>

<p>(Vol. v, p. 443.)</p>

<p>Evan Evans, who is described as being 'incorrigibly addicted to strong
drink,' was Curate of Llanvair Talyhaern, in Denbighshire, and author
of <i>Some Specimens of the Poetry of Antient Welsh Bards translated into
English</i>. London, R. &amp; J. Dodsley, 1764. My friend Mr. Morfill informs
me that he remembers to have seen it stated in a manuscript note in a
book in the Bodleian, that 'Evan Evans would have written much more if
he had not been so much given up to the bottle.'</p>

<p>Gray thus mentions Evan Evans in a letter to Dr. Wharton, written in<br/>

July, 1760:—<br/>
</p>

<p>'The Welsh Poets are also coming to light. I have seen a discourse in
MS. about them (by one Mr. Evans, a clergyman) with specimens of their
writings. This is in Latin; and though it don't approach the other
[Macpherson], there are fine scraps among it.'
—<i>The Works of Thomas Gray</i>, ed. by the Rev. John Mitford. London,
1858, vol. iii, p. 250.</p>

<h3>INDEX TO THE ADDENDA.</h3>

<p>ABERCROMBIE, James, lxii, lxvi.<br/>

ADDENBROKE, Dean, xxxiv.<br/>

ATLAS, the race-horse, lxix, lxx.<br/>
</p>

<p>BARCLAY'S Answer to Kenrick's Review of Johnson's Shakespeare, xlviii.
BARETTI, Joseph, lvii.
BASKETT, Mr., xxxii.
BATHURST, Dr., Proposal for a <i>Geographical Dictionary</i>, xxi.
BAXTER, Richard, on toleration, xlix;
  his doubt, liv;
  rule of preaching, lx;
  on the possible salvation of a suicide, lx;
  on the portion of babies who die unbaptized, lxi.
BERKELEY, Dr., xlix.
BERKELEY, George Monck, lxv.
<i>Big</i>, lxix.
BOSWELL, James, Bishop Percy's Communications, lvii;
  Johnson in his last illness, and to publish 'praises' of him, lxiii;
  <i>Lurgan Clanbrassil</i>, li;
  projected works, lxvii;
  <i>Remarks on the
  profession of a player</i>, lxi;
  visit to Rousseau and Voltaire, xlvi.
BROWNE, Sir Thomas, lviii.
BROWNING, Mr. Robert, lii.
BURKE, Edmund, lxii.</p>

<p>CAMDEN, Lord, xlix.<br/>

CAMPBELL, Archibald, lxix.<br/>

'CAUTION' money, xxxii.<br/>

CLARENDON, Edward, Earl of, l.<br/>

CLARENDON PRESS, xxxii.<br/>

CLOUGH, Sir Richard, lxx.<br/>

COCOA TREE CLUB, lxix.<br/>

CROUSAZ, Jean Pierre de, lxvi.<br/>
</p>

<p>DAVENPORT, William, xxxv.<br/>

DAVIES, Rev. J. Hamilton, xlix, liv, lx, lxi.<br/>

DODSLEY, Robert, xxvi.<br/>

<i>Don Belianis</i>, xli.<br/>
</p>

<p>ENGLAND barren in good historians, xlix.<br/>

ENGLISH pulpit eloquence, lvii.<br/>

EVANS, Evan, lxxi.<br/>

EYRE, Mr., xxxii.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Farm and its Inhabitants</i>, xlii, liii.
<i>Felixmarte of Hircania</i>, xli.
FLOYER, Sir John, lxii.
FOUNDLING HOSPITAL, l.
FRANKING LETTERS, xxxvii.
FREDERICK II. OF PRUSSIA, xlvi.</p>

<p>FRENCH WRITERS, their superficiality, xlvii.<br/>

FULLER, Thomas, <i>Life</i>, lxiv.<br/>
</p>

<p>GARRICK, David, xli, xlv, lxi.<br/>

GIBBON, Edward, xlvii, lvii, lxvi, lxviii, lxix.<br/>

GOUGH, Richard, xxxiv.<br/>

GRAY, Thomas, lxxi.<br/>

GREGORY FAMILY, lxiv.<br/>
</p>

<p>HARINGTON'S <i>Nugae Antiqua</i>, xxxv.<br/>

HAZLITT, William, lxi.<br/>

<i>History of the Marchioness de Pompadour</i>, xxix.<br/>

HOLCROFT, Thomas, lxx.<br/>

HUME, David, xlv.<br/>
</p>

<p>'IT has not wit enough to keep it sweet,' lxiv.</p>

<p>JOHNSON, Michael, xl.<br/>

JOHNSON, Mr., a bookseller, xxix.<br/>

JOHNSON, Mrs., xliii.<br/>

JOHNSON, Samuel, advantages of having a profession or business, lviii;<br/>

  advice about studying, xxxii;<br/>

  anonymous publications, xxix;<br/>

  application for the mastership of Solihull School, xliv;<br/>

  citation of living authors in the Dictionary, lviii;<br/>

  critics of three classes, xlv;<br/>

  difference with Baretti, lvii;<br/>

  discussion on baptism with Mr. Lloyd, liii;<br/>

  knowledge of Italian, xliv;<br/>

  Letters to William Strahan:<br/>

    Apology about some work that was passing through the press, xxv;<br/>

    apprenticing a lad to Mr. Strahan, and a presentation to the Blue<br/>

         Coat School, xxxv;<br/>

    Bathurst's projected <i>Geographical Dictionary</i>, xxi;<br/>

    cancel in the <i>Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland</i>, xxxiii;<br/>

    'copy' and a book by Professor Watson, xxxvii;<br/>

    George Strahan's election to a scholarship, xxx;<br/>

  Miss Williams, taxes due, and a journey, xxvii;<br/>

  printing the <i>Dictionary</i>, xxv-xxviii;<br/>

  <i>Rasselas</i>, xxviii;<br/>

  Suppressions in <i>Taxation no Tyranny</i>, xxxvi;<br/>

    letter to Dr. Taylor, xxxviii;<br/>

    portraits, lxiv;<br/>

    public interest in him, xlviii;<br/>

    romantic virtue, xlviii;<br/>

    transformation of an actor, lxi;<br/>

    trips to the country, lviii; unpublished sermons, lxvi;<br/>

    use of the word <i>big</i>, lxix.<br/>

JONES, Sir William, xxxi.<br/>
</p>

<p>KENRICK, Dr. William xlviii.</p>

<p>LANGLEY, Rev. W., xxxv.<br/>

LETTSOM Dr., lvi<br/>

LICHFIELD, Cathedral, xxxiv;<br/>

  City, and County, xl;<br/>

  described by C. P. Moritz, liv.<br/>

LLOYD, Olivia, xlii.<br/>

LLOYD, Sampson, xlii, liii.<br/>

LOCKE, John, 1.<br/>

LONDON PAVEMENT, lxvii.<br/>

LORT, Dr., lxviii.<br/>
</p>

<p>MASON, Rev. William, xxxix.<br/>

MAUD, Rev. Mr., lv.<br/>

MILLAR, Andrew, xxv, xxviii.<br/>

MITCHELL, Andrew, xlvi.<br/>

MORITZ, C. P., <i>Travels in England in</i> 1782, liv, lv.<br/>

MORRISON'S, Mr. Alfred, <i>Collection of Autographs</i>, xxxviii, li.<br/>
</p>

<p>NEWTON, Bishop Thomas, xxxiv.</p>

<p>OXFORD<br/>

  The proposed Riding School, l;<br/>

    in 1782, lv;<br/>

  University College, xxx.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Palmerin of England</i>, xli.<br/>

PARR, Dr., lix.<br/>

PERCY, Bishop, xlviii, lvii.<br/>

PIOZZI'S, Mrs., 'Collection of Johnson's Letters,' xlviii.<br/>

PLANTA, Joseph, 1.<br/>

PORTEOUS, Captain, xxvii.<br/>

PORTER, Henry, xliii.<br/>

PRETENDER, Young, lxviii.<br/>

PRIESTLEY, Dr. Joseph, lvi.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Rambler</i>, reported Russian version, lxiii.<br/>

REYNOLDS, Sir Joshua, lx.<br/>

ROBERTSON, Dr. William, xxxvii.<br/>

ROUSSEAU, J. J., xlvi.<br/>

ROUTH, Dr., lix.<br/>

RUDD, Mrs., lii.<br/>
</p>

<p>SCOTCH Nationality, xlix.<br/>

SHAKESPEARE'S Popularity, lxviii.<br/>

SHAW, Rev. Mr., xxxvii.<br/>

SHEPHERD, Mr. R. H., xlv.<br/>

SIMPSON, Rev. W. Sparrow, xxxiv.<br/>

SMART, Christopher, lii.<br/>

<i>Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris</i>, lix.<br/>

ST. ANDREWS UNIVERSITY, lxv.<br/>

STEWART, Francis, xxvi.<br/>

STRAHAN, George, xxx.<br/>

STRAHAN, William, xxi, xxvi, xxxii, xxxiii, xxxvi, xxxviii.<br/>

SYNOD OF COOKS, xlvii.<br/>
</p>

<p>TAYLOR, Dr. John, xxxviii.<br/>

TAYLOR, John, of Birmingham, xlii.<br/>

THRALE, Henry, xxxviii.<br/>

TILLOTSON, Archbishop, lxvi.<br/>
</p>

<p>'UNITARIAN,' l.</p>

<p>VACHELL, William, lvi.<br/>

VOLTAIRE, xlvi, lxviii.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Walfords Antiquarian</i>, xlv.</p>

<p>WATSON, Rev. Professor, xxxvii.<br/>

WHITEHEAD, William, xxxix.<br/>

WILKES, John, xlv.<br/>

WILLIAMS, Miss, xxvii.<br/>
</p>

<h2>INDEX</h2>

<h3>A.</h3>

<p>ABBREVIATING NAMES, Johnson's habit of, ii. 258, n. 1.<br/>

ABEL DRUGGER, iii. 35.<br/>

ABERCROMBIE, James, ii. 206, 241, n. 3.<br/>

ABERDEEN, second Earl of, v. 130.<br/>

ABERNETHY, Dr., iv. 272, n. 4.<br/>

ABERNETHY, Rev. John, v. 68.<br/>

ABINGDON, fourth Earl of, iii. 435, n. 4.<br/>

ABINGTON, Mrs., her jelly, ii. 349;<br/>

  Johnson at her benefit, ii. 321, 324, 330;<br/>

  She Stoops to Conquer, ii. 208, n. 5.<br/>

ABJURATION, oath of, ii. 321, n. 4.<br/>

ABNEY, Sir Thomas, i. 493, n. 3.<br/>

ABREU, Marquis of, i. 353.<br/>

ABRIDGMENTS, defended by Johnson, i. 140, n. 5; iv. 381, n. 1;<br/>

  like a cow's calf, v. 72.<br/>

ABROAD, advice to people going, iv. 332.<br/>

ABRUPTNESS, i. 403.<br/>

ABSOLUTE PRINCES, ii. 370.<br/>

ABSTEMIOUS, Johnson, <i>not temperate</i>, i. 468.<br/>

ABSURDITIES, delineating, iv. 17.<br/>

ABUD,——, v. 253, n. 3.<br/>

ABUSE, coarse and refined, iv. 297.<br/>

<i>Abyssinia, A Voyage to</i>, i. 86.<br/>

<i>Academia delta Crusca</i>, i. 298, 443.<br/>

<i>Academy</i>, Mr. Doble's notes on the authorship of <i>The Whole Duty of Man</i>,<br/>

    ii. 239, n. 4.<br/>

<i>Accommodate</i>, v. 310, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Account of an Attempt to ascertain the Longitude</i>, i. 274, n. 2, 301,<br/>

    303, n. 1; ii. 125, n. 4.<br/>

<i>Account of the late Revolution in Sweden</i>, iii. 284.<br/>

<i>Account of Scotland in 1702</i>, iii. 242.<br/>

ACCOUNT-KEEPING, iv. 177.<br/>

ACCURACY, requires immediate record, ii. 217, n. 4;<br/>

    and vigilance, iv. 361;<br/>

  needful in delineating absurdities, iv. 17;<br/>

  Johnson's sayings not accurately reported, ii. 333.<br/>

  See BOSWELL, authenticity.<br/>

ACHAM, v. 454, n. 2.<br/>

ACHILLES, shield of, iv. 33.<br/>

<i>Acid</i>, ii. 362.<br/>

<i>Acis and Galatea</i>, iii. 242, n. 2.<br/>

ACQUAINTANCE, should be varied, iv. 176;<br/>

  making new, iv. 374.<br/>

ACTING, iv. 243-4; v. 38.<br/>

ACTION IN SPEAKING, ridiculed, i. 334;<br/>

  useful only in addressing brutes, ii. 211.<br/>

ACTORS. See PLAYERS.<br/>

<i>Ad Lauram parituram Epigramma</i>, i. 157.<br/>

<i>Ad Ricardum Savage</i>, i. 162, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Ad Urbanum</i>, i. 113.<br/>

ADAM, Robert, <i>Works in Architecture</i>, iii. 161.<br/>

ADAMITES, ii. 251.<br/>

ADAMS, George, <i>Treatise on the Globes</i>, ii. 44.<br/>

ADAMS, John, the American envoy, ii. 40, n. 4.<br/>

ADAMS, Rev. William, D.D., Boswell, letter to, i. 8;<br/>

  everlasting punishment, on, iv. 299;<br/>

  Hume, answers, i. 8, n. 2; ii. 441; iv. 377, n. a;<br/>

    dines with him, ii. 441;<br/>

  Johnson awed by him, i. 74;<br/>

    and Boswell visit him in 1776, ii. 441;<br/>

      in June, 1784, iv. 285;<br/>

      well-treated, iv. 311;<br/>

    and Chesterfield, i. 265-6;<br/>

    and Dr. Clarke, iv. 416, n. 2;<br/>

    <i>Dictionary</i>, i. 186;<br/>

    hypochondria, i. 483;<br/>

    last visit, iv. 376;<br/>

    nominal tutor, i. 79;<br/>

    <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, iv. 376, n. 4;<br/>

    projected book of family prayers, 293;<br/>

    and Dr. Price, iv. 434;<br/>

    projected <i>Bibliotheque</i>, i. 284;<br/>

    projected <i>Life of Alfred</i>, i. 177;<br/>

    undergraduate days, i. 26, n. l, 57, 59, 73; ii. 441;<br/>

    will, not mentioned, in, iv. 402, n. 2;<br/>

  Master of Pembroke College, v. 455, n. 2;<br/>

  rector of St. Chad's, Shrewsbury, v. 455;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 133, 134; v. 122, n. 2.<br/>

ADAMS, Mrs., iv. 285, 300.<br/>

ADAMS, Miss, defends women against Johnson, iv. 291;<br/>

  describes him in letters, iv. 151, n. 2, 305, n. 1;<br/>

  his death, iv. 376, n. 2;<br/>

  his gallantry, iv. 292;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 285.<br/>

ADAMS, William, founder of Newport School, i. 132, n, 1.<br/>

ADAMS, the brothers, the architects, ii. 325.<br/>

ADBASTON, i. 132, n. 1.<br/>

ADDISON, Bonn's edition, iv. 190, n. 1;<br/>

  borrows out of modesty, v. 92, n. 4;<br/>

  Boswell's projected work, i. 225, n. 2;<br/>

  Budgell's papers in the <i>Spectator</i>, iii. 46;<br/>

    <i>Epilogue to The Distressed Mother</i>, ib.;<br/>

  <i>Cato</i>, Dennis criticises it, iii. 40, n. 2;<br/>

    Johnson, i. 199, n. 2;<br/>

    Parson Adams praises it, i. 491, n. 3;<br/>

    Prologue, i. 30, n. 2;<br/>

    eight quotations added to the language, i. 199, n. 2;<br/>

    quotations from it, 'Honour's a sacred tie,' v. 82;<br/>

      'Indifferent in his choice,' iii. 68, n. 1;<br/>

      The Numidian's luxury, iii. 282;<br/>

      'obscurely good,' iv. 138, n. 1;<br/>

      'Painful pre-eminence,' iii. 82, n. 2;<br/>

    'the Romans call it Stoicism,' i. 333;<br/>

    'Smothered in the dusty whirlwind,' v. 291;<br/>

    'This must end 'em,' ii. 54, n. 2;<br/>

  Christian religion, defence of the, v. 89, '2. 7;<br/>

  conversation, ii. 256; iii. 339;<br/>

  death of a piece with a man's life, v. 397, n. 1;<br/>

  death-bed described by H. Walpole, v. 269, n. 2;<br/>

  dedication of <i>Rosamond</i>, v. 376, n. 3;<br/>

  encouraged a man in his absurdity, v. 243;<br/>

  English historians, ii. 236, n. 2;<br/>

  familiar day, his, iv. 91, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Freeholder</i>, i. 344, n. 4; ii. 61, n. 4, 319, n. 1;<br/>

  Freeport, Sir Andrew, ii. 212; v. 328;<br/>

  French learning, v. 310;<br/>

  general knowledge in his time rare, iv. 217, n. 4;<br/>

  ghosts, iv. 95;<br/>

  Italian learning, ii. 346; v. 310;<br/>

  Johnson praises him, i. 425;<br/>

  judgment of the public, i. 200, n. 2;<br/>

  Latin verses, i. 61, n. 1;<br/>

  Leandro Alberti, ii. 346;<br/>

  <i>Life</i> by Johnson, iv. 52-4;<br/>

  'mixed wit,' i. 179, n. 3;<br/>

  Newton on space, v. 287, n. 1;<br/>

  'nine-pence in ready money,' ii. 256;<br/>

  <i>notanda</i>, i. 204;<br/>

  party-lying, ii. 188, n. 2;<br/>

  Pope's lines on him, ii. 85;<br/>

  <i>procerity</i>, i. 308;<br/>

  prose, iv. 5, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Remarks on Italy</i>, ii. 346; v. 310;<br/>

  Socrates, projected tragedy on, v. 89, n. 7;<br/>

  <i>Spectator</i>, his half of the, iii. 33;<br/>

    dexterity rewarded by a king, iii. 231;<br/>

    knotting, iii. 242, n. 3;<br/>

    pamphleteer, iii. 319, n. 1;<br/>

    portrait of a clergyman, iv. 76;<br/>

    preacher in a country town, iv. 185, n. 1;<br/>

    Sir Roger de Coverley's incipient madness, i. 63, n. 2; ii. 371;<br/>

      death, ii. 370;<br/>

    story of the widow, ii. 371;<br/>

    Thames ribaldry, iv. 26;<br/>

    <i>The Old Man's Wish</i> sung to him, iv. 19, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Stavo bene</i> &amp;c., ii. 346;<br/>

  Steele, loan to, iv. 52, 91;<br/>

  style, i. 224, 225, n. 1;<br/>

  Swift, compared with, v. 44;<br/>

  wine, love of, i. 359; iii. 155; iv. 53, 398: v. 269, n. 2;<br/>

    warm with wine when he wrote <i>Spectators</i>, iv. 91.<br/>

<i>Address of the Painters to George III</i>, i. 352.<br/>

<i>Address to the Throne</i>, i. 321.<br/>

ADDRESSES TO THE CROWN IN 1784, i. 311; iv. 265.<br/>

ADELPHI, built by the Adams, ii. 325, n, 3;<br/>

  Beauclerk's 'box,' ii. 378, n. 1; iv. 99;<br/>

  Boswell and Johnson at the rails, iv. 99;<br/>

  Garrick's house, iv. 96.<br/>

ADEY, Miss, i. 38, 466; iii. 412; iv. 142.<br/>

ADEY, Mrs., ii. 388; iii. 393.<br/>

ADMIRATION, ii. 360.<br/>

ADOPTION, ancient mode of, i. 254.<br/>

<i>Adriani morientis ad animam suam</i>, iii. 420, n. 2.<br/>

ADULTERY, comparative guilt of a husband and wife, ii. 56; iii. 406;<br/>

  confusion of property caused by it, ii. 55.<br/>

ADVENT-SUNDAY, ii. 288.<br/>

<i>Adventurer</i>, started by Hawkesworth, i. 234;<br/>

  contributors, i. 252, n. 2, 253-4; v. 238;<br/>

  Johnson's contributions, i. 252-5;<br/>

    his love of London, i. 320;<br/>

  papers marked T., i. 207.<br/>

<i>Adventures of a Guinea</i>, v. 275.<br/>

<i>Adversaria</i>, Johnson's, i. 205.<br/>

ADVERSARIES. See ANTAGONISTS.<br/>

<i>Advice to the Grub-Street Verse-Writers</i>, i. 143, n. 1.<br/>

ADVISERS, the common deficiency of, iii. 363.<br/>

<i>àgri Ephemeris</i>, iv. 381.<br/>

AESCHYLUS, Darius's shade, iv. 16, n. 2;<br/>

  Potter's translation, iii. 256.<br/>

<i>àsop at Play</i>, iii. 191.<br/>

AFFAIRS, managing one's, iv. 87.<br/>

AFFECTATION, distress, of, iv. 71;<br/>

  dying, in, v. 397;<br/>

  familiarity with the great, of, iv. 62;<br/>

  rant of a parent, iii. 149;<br/>

  silence and talkativeness, iii. 261;<br/>

  studied behaviour, i. 470;<br/>

    bursts of admiration, iv. 27.<br/>

  See SINGULARITY.<br/>

AFFECTION, descends, iii. 390;<br/>

  natural, ii. 101; iv. 210;<br/>

AGAMEMNON, v. 79, 82, n. 4.<br/>

AGAR, Welbore Ellis, iii. 118, n. 3.<br/>

AGE, old. See OLD AGE.<br/>

AGE, present, better than previous ones, ii. 341, n. 3;<br/>

    except in reverence for government, iii. 3;<br/>

    and authority, iii. 262;<br/>

    not worse, iv. 288;<br/>

  querulous declamations against, iii. 226.<br/>

<i>Agis</i>, Home's, v. 204, n. 6.<br/>

<i>Agriculture, Memoirs of</i>, by R. Dossie, iv. 11.<br/>

AGUTTER, Rev. William, iv. 286, n. 3, 298, n. 2, 422.<br/>

AIKIN, Miss. See BARBAULD, Mrs.<br/>

AIR, new kinds of, iv. 237.<br/>

AIR-BATH, iii. 168.<br/>

AJACCIO, i. 119, n. 1.<br/>

AKENSIDE, Mark, M.D., Gray and Mason, superior to, iii. 32;<br/>

  <i>Life</i>, by Johnson, iv. 56;<br/>

  medicine, defence of, iii. 22, n, 4;<br/>

  <i>Odes</i>, ii. 164;<br/>

  <i>Pleasures of the Imagination</i>, i. 359; ii. 164;<br/>

  Rolt's impudent claim, i. 359;<br/>

  Townshend, friendship with, iii. 3.<br/>

AKERMAN,—, Keeper of Newgate, Boswell's esteemed friend, iii. 431;<br/>

  courage at the Gordon riots, and at an earlier fire, ib.;<br/>

  praised by Burke and Johnson, iii. 433;<br/>

  profits of his office, iii. 431, n 1.<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 145.<br/>

ALBEMARLE, Lord, <i>Memoirs of Rockingham</i>, iii. 460; v. 113, n. 1.<br/>

ALBERTI, LEANDRO, ii. 346; v. 310<br/>

<i>Albin and the Daughter of Mey</i>, v. 171.<br/>

ALCHYMY, ii. 376.<br/>

<i>Alciat's Emblems</i>, ii. 290. n. 4.<br/>

ALCIBIADES, his dog, iii. 231;<br/>

    alluded to by William Scott, iii. 267.<br/>

ALDRICH, Dean, ii. 187, n. 3.<br/>

ALDRICH, Rev. S., i. 407, n. 3.<br/>

ALEPPO, iii. 369; iv. 22.<br/>

ALEXANDER THE GREAT, i. 250; ii. 194; iv. 274.<br/>

<i>Alexandreis</i>, iv. 181, n. 3.<br/>

ALFRED, <i>Life</i>, i. 177;<br/>

  will, iv. 133, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Alias</i>, iv. 217.<br/>

ALKERINGTON, iv. 335, n. 1.<br/>

<i>All for Love</i>, iv. 114, n. 1.<br/>

ALLEN, Edmund, the printer, dinner at his house, i. 470;<br/>

  Dodd, kindness to, iii. 141, 145;<br/>

  Johnson's birth-day dinners, at, iii. 157, n. 3; iv. 135, n. 1,<br/>

239, n. 2;<br/>

    imitated, iii. 269-270; iv. 92;<br/>

    landlord and friend, iii. 141, 269;<br/>

    letter from, iv. 228;<br/>

    loan to, i. 5l2, n. 1;<br/>

    pretended brother, exposes, v. 295;<br/>

    grieves at his death, iv. 354, 360, 366, 369, 379.<br/>

  <i>Marshall's Minutes of Agriculture</i>, iii. 313;<br/>

  Smart's contract with Gardner, ii. 345;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 380.<br/>

ALLEN, Ralph, account of him, v. 80, n. 5;<br/>

  Warburton married his niece, ii. 37, n. 1.<br/>

ALLEN, H., of Magdalen Hall, i. 336.<br/>

ALLEN, ——, i. 36, n. 2.<br/>

ALLESTREE, Richard, ii. 239, n. 4.<br/>

ALMACK'S, iii. 23, n. 1.<br/>

ALMANAC, history no better than an, ii. 366.<br/>

ALMON'S <i>Memoirs of John Wilkes</i>, i. 349, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Almost nothing</i>, ii. 446, n. 3; iii. 154, n. 1.<br/>

ALMS-GIVING, Fielding, condemned by, ii. 119, n. 4, 212, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's practice, ii. 119; <i>ib. n.</i> 4;<br/>

  money generally wasted, iv. 3;<br/>

    better laid out in luxury, iii. 56;<br/>

  Whigs, condemned by true, ii, 212.<br/>

ALNWICK CASTLE, Johnson, visited by, iii. 272, n. 3;<br/>

  Pennant, described by, iii. 272-3;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 117, n. 1.<br/>

ALONSO THE WISE, ii. 238, n. 1.<br/>

ALTHORP, Lord (second Earl Spencer), iii. 424.<br/>

ALTHORP, Lord (third Earl Spencer), iii. 424, n. 4.<br/>

AMBASSADOR, a foreign, iii. 410;<br/>

  Wotton's, Sir H., definition, ii. 170, n. 3.<br/>

AMBITION, iii. 39.<br/>

<i>Amelia. See</i> FIELDING.<br/>

AMENDMENTS OF A SENTENCE, iv. 38.<br/>

AMERICA; Beresford, Mrs., an American lady, iv. 283;<br/>

  Boston Port Bill, ii. 294, n. 1;<br/>

  Burgoyne's surrender, iii. 355, n. 3;<br/>

  Carolina library, i. 309, n. 2;<br/>

  Chesapeak, iv. 140, n. 2.<br/>

  City address to the King in 1781, iv. 139, n. 4;<br/>

  Clinton, Sir Henry, iv. 140, n. 2;<br/>

  Concord, iii. 314, n. 6;<br/>

  Congress, ii. 312, 409, 479;<br/>

  Constitutional Society, subscription raised by the, iii. 314, n. 6;<br/>

  Convict settlements, ii. 312, n. 3;<br/>

  Cornwallis's capitulation, iii. 355, n. 3; iv. 140, n. 2;<br/>

  discovery of, i. 455, n. 3; ii. 479;<br/>

  dominion lost, iv. 260, n. 2;<br/>

  emigration to it an immersion in barbarism, v. 78:<br/>

    See Emigration, and Scotland, emigration;<br/>

  English opposition to the American war, iv. 81;<br/>

  France, assistance from, iv. 21;<br/>

  Franklin's letter to W. Strahan, iii. 364, n. 1:<br/>

    See Dr. Franklin;<br/>

  Georgia, i. 90, n. 3, 127, n. 4; v. 299;<br/>

  Hume's opinion of the war, iii. 46, n. 5; iv. 194, n. 1;<br/>

  independence, chimerical, i. 309, n. 2;<br/>

  influence on mankind, i. 309, n. 2;<br/>

  Irish Protestants well-wishers to the rebellion, iii. 408, n. 4;<br/>

  Johnson 'avoids the rebellious land,' iii. 435, n. 4;<br/>

    feelings towards the Americans, ii. 478-480; iii. 200-1; iv. 283;<br/>

      calls them a 'race of convicts,' ii. 312;<br/>

      'wild rant,' ii. 315, n. 1; iii. 290;<br/>

        abuse, 315;<br/>

    parody of <i>Burke on American taxation</i>, iv. 318;<br/>

    <i>Patriot</i>, ii. 286;<br/>

    relicks of, in America, ii. 207;<br/>

    <i>Taxation no Tyranny</i>, ii. 312;<br/>

  Lee, Arthur, agent in England, iii. 68, n. 3;<br/>

  Lexington, iii. 314, n. 6;<br/>

  libels in 1784, i. 116, n. 1;<br/>

  life in the wilds, ii. 228;<br/>

  literature gaining ground, i. 309, n. 2;<br/>

  Loudoun, Lord, General in America, v. 372, n. 3;<br/>

  Mansfield, Lord, approves of burning their houses, iii. 429, n. 1;<br/>

  Markham's, Archbishop, sermon, v. 36, n. 3;<br/>

  money sent to the English army, iv. 104;<br/>

  New England, iv. 358, n. 2; v. 317;<br/>

  North's, Lord, conciliatory  propositions, iii. 221;<br/>

  objects for observation, i. 367;<br/>

  peace, negotiations of, iv. 158, n. 4;<br/>

  preliminary treaty of, iv. 282, n. 1;<br/>

  Pennsylvania, ii. 207, n. 2;<br/>

  Philadelphia, i. 309, n. 2; iii. 364, n. 1; iv. 212, n. 1;<br/>

  planters, ii. 27;<br/>

  population, growth of, ii. 314;<br/>

  <i>Rasselas</i>, reprint of, ii. 207;<br/>

  Saratoga, iii. 355, n. 3;<br/>

  slavery, England guilty of, ii. 479;<br/>

  Susquehannah, v. 317;<br/>

  taxation by England, ii. 312; iii. 205-7, 221; iv. 259, n. 1;<br/>

  Virginia, ii. 27, n. 1; 479;<br/>

  war with America popular in Scotland, iv. 259, n. 1;<br/>

  war with the French in 1756-7, i. 308, n. 2; ii. 479; iii. 9, n. 1;<br/>

  Walpole, Horace, on the slaveholders, iii. 200, n. 4;<br/>

  Wesley's <i>Calm Address</i>, v. 35, n. 3;<br/>

  York Town, iv. 140, n. 2.<br/>

AMHERST, Lord, iii. 374, n. 3.<br/>

AMIENS, ii. 402, n. 2.<br/>

AMORY, Dr. Thomas, iii. 174, n. 3.<br/>

AMUSEMENTS,<br/>

  key to character, iv. 316;<br/>

  public, keep people from vice, ii. 169.<br/>

AMWELL, ii. 338.<br/>

AMYAT, Dr., i. 377, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Ana</i>, v. 311, n. 2, 414.<br/>

ANACREON,<br/>

  Baxter's edition, iv. 163, 241, 265; v. 376;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 202.<br/>

ANAITIS, the Goddess, v. 218, 220, 224.<br/>

<i>Anatomy of Melancholy</i>, ii. 121.<br/>

ANCESTRY, ii. 153, 261.<br/>

ANCIENT TIMES worse than Modern, iv. 217.<br/>

ANCIENTS, not serious in religion, iii. 10.<br/>

ANDERDON, J. L., iii. 195, n. 1.<br/>

ANDERSON, John, <i>Nachrichten von Island</i>, iii. 279, n. 1.<br/>

ANDERSON, Professor, of Glasgow, iii. 119; v. 369, 370.<br/>

ANDREWS, Francis, i. 489.<br/>

<i>Anecdote</i>, ii. 11, n. 1.<br/>

ANECDOTES, Johnson's love of, ii. 11; v. 39.<br/>

<i>Anecdotes of distinguished persons</i>, iii. 123, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Anfractuosity</i>, iv. 4.<br/>

ANGEL, Captain, i. 349.<br/>

ANGELL, John, <i>Stenography</i>, ii. 224; iii. 270.<br/>

ANGER, unreasonable, but natural, ii. 377.<br/>

ANIMAL, noblest, v. 400.<br/>

ANIMAL SUBSTANCES, v. 216.<br/>

ANIMALS. See BRUTES.<br/>

<i>Animus Aequus</i>, not inheritable, v. 381.<br/>

<i>Animus irritandi</i>, iv. 130.<br/>

<i>Aningait and Ajut</i>, iv. 421, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Annals of Scotland</i>. See LORD HAILES.<br/>

ANNE, Queen,<br/>

  'touches' Johnson, i. 42;<br/>

  grant to the Synod of Argyle, iii. 133;<br/>

  writers of her age, i. 425.<br/>

ANNIHILATION, Hume's principle, iii. 153;<br/>

  worse than existence in pain, 295-6; v. 180.<br/>

ANNUAL REGISTER, Barnard's verses on Johnson, iv. 431-3.<br/>

ANONYMOUS WRITINGS, iii. 376.<br/>

ANSON, Lord, i. 117, n. 2; iii. 374.<br/>

ANSTEY, Christopher, <i>New Bath Guide</i>, i. 388, n. 3.<br/>

ANSTRUTHER, J., ii. 191, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Ant, The</i>, ii. 25.<br/>

ANTAGONISTS, how they should be treated, ii. 442; v. 29.<br/>

<i>Anthologia</i>, Johnson's translations, iv. 384.<br/>

<i>Anti-Artemonius</i>, i. 148, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Antigallican</i>, i. 320.<br/>

ANTIMOSAICAL REMARK, ii. 468.<br/>

<i>Antiquae Linguae: Britannicae Thesaurus</i>, i. 186, n. 3.<br/>

ANTIQUARIAN RESEARCHES, iii. 333, 414.<br/>

ANTIQUARIAN SOCIETY, iv. 436.<br/>

ANTIQUARIANS, iii. 278.<br/>

<i>Apartment</i>, ii. 398, n. 1.<br/>

APELLES'S VENUS, iv. 104.<br/>

APICIUS, ii. 447.<br/>

<i>Apocrypha</i>, ii. 189, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Apollonii pugna Belricia</i>, ii. 263.<br/>

APOLLONIUS RHODIUS, i. 289.<br/>

<i>Apophthegms of Johnson</i>, i. 190, n. 4; iv. 324.<br/>

APOSTOLICAL ORDINATION, ii. 103.<br/>

<i>Apotheosis of Milton</i>, i. 140.<br/>

APPARITIONS. See SPIRITS.<br/>

<i>Appeal to the publick</i>, etc. i. 140.<br/>

APPETITE, riding for an, i. 467, n. 2.<br/>

APPIUS, in the <i>Cato Major</i>, iv. 374.<br/>

APPLAUSE, iv. 32.<br/>

APPLE DUMPLINGS, ii. 132.<br/>

APPLEBY SCHOOL, in Leicestershire, i. 82, n. 2; 132, n. 1.<br/>

APPLICATION, to one thing more than another, v. 34-5.<br/>

APPREHENSIONS. See FANCIES.<br/>

ARABIC, iv. 28.<br/>

ARABS, v. 125.<br/>

ARBUTHNOT, Dr. John, <i>Dunciad</i>, annotations on the, iv. 306, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>History of John Bull</i>, i. 452, n. 2; v. 44, n. 4;<br/>

  illustrious physician, an, ii. 372;<br/>

  <i>Memoirs of Martinus Scriblerus</i>, i. 452, n. 2; v. 44, n. 4;<br/>

    universal genius, i. 425; v. 29, n. 2;<br/>

  superior to Swift in coarse humour, v. 44.<br/>

ARBUTHNOT, Robert, v. 29, 32.<br/>

<i>Archaeological Dictionary</i>, iv. 162.<br/>

ARCHBISHOP, Johnson's bow to an, iv. 198.<br/>

ARCHES, semicircular, and elliptical, i. 35l.<br/>

ARCHITECTURE, ornamental, ii. 439.<br/>

ARESKINE, Sir John, v. 293.<br/>

ARGENSON,—, ii. 391.<br/>

ARGONAUTS, i. 458.<br/>

ARGUING, good-humour in, iii. 11.<br/>

ARGUMENT, compared with testimony, iv. 281-2;<br/>

  getting the better of people in one, ii. 474;<br/>

  opponent, introducing one's, ii. 475.<br/>

ARGYLE, first Marquis of, v. 357, n. 3.<br/>

ARGYLE, ninth Earl of, v. 357, n. 3.<br/>

ARGYLE, tenth Earl (first Duke) of, v. 227, n. 4.<br/>

ARGYLE, John, second Duke of, <i>Beggar's Opera</i>, sees the, ii. 369, n. 1;<br/>

  Elwall, challenged by, ii. 164, n. 5;<br/>

  Walpole as sole minister, attacks, ii. 355, n. 2.<br/>

ARGYLE, Archibald, third Duke of,<br/>

  librarian, neglects his, i. 187; a narrow man, v. 345;<br/>

  Wilkes visits him, iii. 73.<br/>

ARGYLE, John, fifth Duke of, at Ashbourne, iii. 207, n. 1;<br/>

  Boswell calls on him, v. 353-4;<br/>

  estates in Col. v. 293;<br/>

    Tyr-yi, v. 312;<br/>

    Iona, v. 335;<br/>

  Gordon riots, rumour about him at the, iii. 430, n. 6;<br/>

  Johnson dines with him, v. 355-9;<br/>

    is provided by him with a horse, v. 359, 362;<br/>

    corresponds with him, v. 363-4;<br/>

  lawsuit with Sir A. Maclean, ii. 380, n. 4; iii. 101, 102.<br/>

ARGYLE, Duchess of (in 1752), i. 246.<br/>

ARGYLE, Elizabeth Gunning, Duchess of, account of her, v. 353, n. 1;<br/>

  at Ashbourne, iii. 207, n. 1;<br/>

  dislikes Boswell, v. 353;<br/>

    slights him, v. 354, 358-9;<br/>

  he drinks to her, v. 356;<br/>

  Johnson undertakes to get her a book, v. 356, 363;<br/>

    is 'all attention' to her, v. 359, 363;<br/>

    calls her 'a Duchess with three tails', v. 359.<br/>

ARIAN HERESY, iv. 32.<br/>

ARIOSTO, i. 278; v. 368, n. 1.<br/>

ARISTOTLE, Barrow, quoted by, iv. 105, n. 4;<br/>

  difference between the learned and unlearned, iv. 13;<br/>

  friendship, on, iii. 386, n. 3;<br/>

  Lydiat, attacked by, i. 194, n. 2;<br/>

  lying, on, ii. 221, n. 2;<br/>

  purging of the passions, iii. 39.<br/>

ARITHMETIC, Johnson's fondness for it, i. 72; iv. 171, n. 3, 271;<br/>

  principles soon comprehended, v. 138, n. 2.<br/>

ARKWRIGHT, Richard, ii. 459, n. 1.<br/>

ARMORIAL BEARINGS, ii. 179.<br/>

ARMS, piling, iii. 355.<br/>

ARMSTRONG, Dr., iii. 117.<br/>

ARMY. See SOLDIERS.<br/>

ARNAULD, Antoine, iii. 347.<br/>

ARNE, Dr., v. 126, n. 5.<br/>

ARNOLD, Thomas, M.D., <i>Observations on Insanity</i>, iii. 175, n. 3.<br/>

ARRAN, Earl of, i. 281.<br/>

ARRIGHI, A., <i>Histoire de Pascal Paoli</i>, ii. 3, n. I; v. 51, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Art of Living in London</i>, i. 105, n. 1.<br/>

'ART'S CORRECTIVE,' v. 299.<br/>

ARTEMISIA, ii. 76.<br/>

ARTHRITICK TYRANNY, i. 179.<br/>

ARTICLES. See THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES.<br/>

ARTIFICIALLY, iii. 50, n. 4.<br/>

ARTISTS, Society of. See SOCIETY OF ARTISTS.<br/>

<i>Ascertain</i>, iii. 402, n. 2.<br/>

ASCHAM, Roger, bachelor's degree, takes his, i. 58, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Life</i> by Johnson, i. 464;<br/>

  quoted, i. 307, n. 2.<br/>

ASH, Dr., iv. 394, n. 4.<br/>

ASHBOURNE, church, iii. 180;<br/>

  earthquake, iii. 136;<br/>

  Green Man Inn, iii. 208;<br/>

  Johnson's visits, iii. 451-3;<br/>

    and the Thrales visit it in 1774, v. 430;<br/>

    and Boswell in 1776, ii. 473-6;<br/>

      in 1777, iii. 135-208;<br/>

  school, ii. 324, n. 1; iii. 138;<br/>

  two convicts of the town hang themselves, iv. 359;<br/>

  water-fall, iii. 190.<br/>

ASHBY, i. 36, n. 3, 79, n. 2.<br/>

ASHMOLE, Elias, iii. 172; iv. 97, n. 3.<br/>

ASIATIC SOCIETY, ii. 125, n. 4.<br/>

ASSENT, a debt or a favour, iv. 320.<br/>

ASSYRIANS, ii. 176; iii. 36.<br/>

ASTLE, Rev. Mr., iv. 311.<br/>

ASTLE, Thomas, letter from Johnson, iv. 133;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 155; iv. 311.<br/>

ASTLEY, the equestrian, iii. 409.<br/>

ASTOCKE, i. 79, n. 1.<br/>

ASTON, Catherine (Hon. Mrs. Henry Hervey), i. 83, n. 4.<br/>

ASTON, Margaret (Mrs. Walmsley), i. 83, n. 4; ii. 466.<br/>

ASTON, Miss (Mrs.), ii. 466, 469; iii. 132, 211, 412, 414; iv. 145, n. 2.<br/>

ASTON, 'Molly' (Mrs. Brodie), account of her, i. 83; ii. 466;<br/>

  interest of money, on the, iii. 340-1;<br/>

  Johnson's epigram on her, i. 83, n. 3; 140, n. 4; iii. 341, n. 1;<br/>

    her letters to, iii. 341, n. 1;<br/>

    quoted by, iii. 341, n. 1;<br/>

  Lyttelton, Lord, preference for, iv. 57.<br/>

ASTON, Sir Thomas, i. 83, 106, n. 1.<br/>

ASTON HALL, ii. 456, n. 2.<br/>

ATHEISM, v. 47.<br/>

<i>Athelstan</i>, ii. 131, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Athenoeum, The</i>, Boswell's letters of acceptance as Secretary of the<br/>

    Royal Academy, iii. 370, n. 1;<br/>

  mistake in Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 208, n. 5.<br/>

<i>Athenian Letters</i>, i. 45, n. 2.<br/>

ATHENIANS, barbarians, ii. 171;<br/>

  brutes, 211.<br/>

ATHOL, Earl of, ii. 7;<br/>

  family of, v. 234.<br/>

<i>Athol porridge</i>, iv. 78.<br/>

ATLANTIC, Johnson on the, v. 163.<br/>

ATONEMENT, The, v. 88.<br/>

ATTACKS ON AUTHORS;<br/>

  attack is the reaction, ii. 335<br/>

  better to be attacked than unnoticed, iii. 375 v. 273<br/>

  part of a man's consequence, iv. 422<br/>

  'fame is a shuttlecock,' v. 400<br/>

  very rarely hurt an author, iii. 423<br/>

  useful, in subjects of taste, v. 275<br/>

  felt by authors, ib. n. 1<br/>

  Addison, Hume, Swift, Young on them, ii. 61, n. 4<br/>

  Bentley, ii. 61, n. 4; v. 274, n. 4;<br/>

  Boerhaave, ii. 61, n. 4<br/>

  Fielding, v. 275, n. 1<br/>

  <i>Rambler, Vicar of Wakefield</i>, Hume, and Boileau, iii. 375, n. 1<br/>

  Johnson's solitary reply to one, i. 314; ii. 61, ib. n. 4.<br/>

ATTERBURY, Bishop, elegance of his English, ii. 95, n. 2<br/>

  <i>Funeral Sermon on Lady Cutts</i>, ii. 228<br/>

  <i>Sermons</i>, iii. 247<br/>

  mentioned, i. 157.<br/>

ATTORNEY-GENERAL, <i>Diabolus Regis</i>, iii. 78.<br/>

ATTORNEYS converted into Solicitors, iv. 128, n. 3<br/>

  Johnson's hits at them, ii. 126, ib. n. 4; iv. 313.<br/>

AUCHINLECK, Lord, account of him, v. 375-6, 382, n. 2<br/>

  Baxter's <i>Anacreon</i>, collated, iv. 241<br/>

  attentive to remotest relations, v. 131<br/>

  Boswell's ignorance of law, ii. 21, n. 4; v. 108, n. 2<br/>

  Boswell, his disposition towards: See BOSWELL, father<br/>

  contentment, iii. 241; v. 381<br/>

  death, iv. 154<br/>

    'in a place where there is no room for Whiggism,' v. 385<br/>

  described in a <i>Hypochondriack</i>, i. 426, n. 3<br/>

  Douglas Cause, ii. 50, n. 4<br/>

  entails his estate in perpetuity, ii. 413-4<br/>

  Gillespie, Dr., <i>honorarium</i> to, iv. 262<br/>

  heirs general, preference for, ii. 414-5<br/>

  calls Johnson a dominie, i. 96, n. 1; v. 382, n. 2<br/>

    a Jacobite fellow, v. 376<br/>

    <i>Ursa Major</i>, v. 384<br/>

    a brute, ii. 381, n. 1; v. 384, n. 1<br/>

    proposes to send him the <i>Lives</i>, iii. 372<br/>

    visits him, v. 375-385<br/>

    three topics in which they differ, v. 376<br/>

    contest, v. 382-4<br/>

    polite parting, v. 385<br/>

  Knight the negro's case, iii. 216<br/>

  Laird of Lochbury, trial of the, v. 343<br/>

  loves labour, ii. 99;<br/>

  planter of trees, iii. 103; v. 380<br/>

  respected, v. 91, 131, 135<br/>

  second wife, ii. 140, n. 1; v. 375, n. 4;<br/>

    Boswell on ill terms with her, ii. 377, n. 1; iii. 80, n. 2<br/>

  tenderness, want of, iii. 182<br/>

  windows broken by a mob, v. 353, n. 1<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 4, 206, 290, 291; iii. 129.<br/>

AUCHINLECK PLACE. See SCOTLAND, Auchinleck.<br/>

AUCTIONEERS, long pole at their door, ii. 349.<br/>

AUGUSTAN AGE, flattery, ii. 234.<br/>

AUGUSTUS, ii. 234, 470.<br/>

AULUS GELLIUS, v. 232.<br/>

AUSONIUS, i. 184; ii. 35, n. 5; iii. 263, n. 3.<br/>

AUSTEN, Miss, <i>Pride and Prejudice</i>, iii. 299, n. 2.<br/>

AUSTERITIES, religious. See MONASTERY.<br/>

AUSTRIA, House of, epigram on it, v. 233.<br/>

AUTEROCHE, Chappe d', iii. 340.<br/>

AUTHOR, an, of considerable eminence, iv. 323<br/>

  one of restless vanity, iv. 319<br/>

  who married a printer's devil, iv. 99<br/>

  who was a voluminous rascal, ii. 109.<br/>

AUTHORITY,<br/>

  from personal respect, ii. 443<br/>

  lessened, iii. 262.<br/>

AUTHORS,<br/>

  attacks on them; See ATTACKS;<br/>

  best part of them in their books, i. 450, n. 1;<br/>

  chief glory of a people from them, i. 297, n. 3; ii. 125;<br/>

  complaints of, iv. 172;<br/>

  contrast between their life and writings, ii. 257, n. 1;<br/>

  consolation in their hours of gloom, ii. 69, n. 3;<br/>

  dread of them, i. 450, n. 1;<br/>

  eminent men need not turn authors, iii. 182;<br/>

  fit subjects for biography, iv. 98, n. 4;<br/>

  flatter the age, v. 59;<br/>

  hunted with a cannister at their tail, iii. 320;<br/>

  Johnson consulted by them<br/>

    'a man who wrote verses,' ii. 51;<br/>

    Colley Cibber, ii. 92;<br/>

      'a lank and reverend bard,' iii. 373'<br/>

    Crabbe, iv. 121, n. 4;<br/>

      a tragedy-writer, iv. 244, n. 2;<br/>

      young Mr. Tytler, v. 402;<br/>

        advises to print boldly, ii. 195;<br/>

        advice very difficult to give, iii. 320;<br/>

        willing to assist them, iii. 373, n. 1; iv. 121; v. 402;<br/>

    put to the torture, ib.<br/>

    <i>Project for the employment of Authors</i>, i. 306, n. 3;<br/>

    wonders at their number, v. 59;<br/>

  judgment of their own works, i. 192, n. 1; iv. 251, n. 2;<br/>

  language characteristical, iv. 315;<br/>

  lie, whether ever allowed to, iv. 305-6;<br/>

  modern, the moons of literature, iii. 333;<br/>

  obscure ones, i. 307, n. 2;<br/>

  patrons, iv. 172;<br/>

  patronage done with, v. 59;<br/>

  payments received:<br/>

    <i>Adventurer</i>, two guineas a paper, i. 253;<br/>

    Baretti, translation of some of Reynolds's <i>Discourses</i> into Italian,<br/>

twenty-five guineas, iii. 96;<br/>

    Blair, <i>Sermons</i>, vol. i, £200, vol. ii. £300, vol. iii. £600, iii. 98;<br/>

    Boswell, <i>Corsica</i>, 100 guineas, ii. 46, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Critical Review</i>, two guineas a sheet, iv. 214, n. 2;<br/>

      <i>Monthly</i>, sometimes four guineas, ib.;<br/>

    Fielding, <i>Tom Jones</i>, £700, i. 287, n. 3;<br/>

    Goldsmith, <i>Vicar of Wakefield</i>, £60, i. 415;<br/>

      <i>Traveller</i>, £21, ib., n. 2;<br/>

    Hawkesworth, £6000 for editing <i>Cook's Voyages</i>, i. 341, n. 4;<br/>

    Hill, Sir John, fifteen guineas a week, ii. 38, n. 2;<br/>

    Hooke, £5000 for the Duchess of Marlborough's <i>Apology</i>, v. 175, n. 3;<br/>

    Johnson: See JOHNSON, payments for his writings;<br/>

    payment by line, i. 193, n. 1;<br/>

    Piozzi, Mrs., for Johnson's Letters, £500, ii. 43, n. 1;<br/>

    Robertson offered £500 for one edition of his <i>History of Scotland</i>,<br/>

iii. 334, n. 2;<br/>

      £6000 made by the publishers; offered 3000 guineas for <i>Charles V</i>,<br/>

ii. 63, n. 2;<br/>

    Sacheverell, £100 for a sermon, i. 39, n. 1;<br/>

    Shebbeare six guineas for a sheet for reviews, iv. 214;<br/>

    Savage, <i>Wanderer</i>, ten guineas, i. 124, n. 4;<br/>

    Whitehead, Paul, ten guineas for a poem, i. 124;<br/>

  pleasure in writing for the journals, v. 59, n. 2;<br/>

  privateers, like, iv. 191, n. 1;<br/>

  private life, in, i. 393;<br/>

  public, the, their judges, i. 200;<br/>

  putting into a book as much as a book will hold, ii. 237;<br/>

  regard for their first magazine, i. 112;<br/>

  reluctance to write their own lives, i. 25, n. 1;<br/>

  respect due to them, iii. 310; iv. 114;<br/>

  sale of their works to the booksellers, iii. 333-4;<br/>

  styles, distinguished by their, iii. 280;<br/>

  treatment by managers of theatres, i. 196, n. 2;<br/>

  writing for profit, iii. 162;<br/>

    on subjects in which they have not practised, ii. 430.<br/>

<i>Authors by Profession</i>, i. 116.<br/>

AVARICE, despised not hated, iii. 71<br/>

  not inherent, iii. 322.<br/>

AVENUES, v. 439.<br/>

AVERROES, i. 188, n. 4.<br/>

AVIGNON, iii. 446.<br/>

AYLESBURY, Lady, iii. 429, n. 3.<br/>
</p>

<h3>B.</h3>

<p id="id00822" style="margin-left: 0%; margin-right: 0%">B—D, Mr., Johnson's letter to, ii, 207.
BABY, Johnson as nurse to one newborn, ii. 100.
BABYLON, i. 250.
BACH, ii. 364, n. 3.
BACON, Francis, <i>Advancement of Learning</i>, i. 34, n. 1;
  argument and testimony, on, iv. 281;
  conversation, precept for, iv. 236;
  death, the stroke of, ii. 107, n. 1;
  delight in superiority natural, iv. 164, n. 1;
  <i>Essays</i> estimated by Burke and Johnson, iii. 194, n. 1;
  <i>Essay of Truth</i> quoted, iv. 221, n. 3;
  <i>Essay on Vicissitude</i>, v. 117, n. 4;
  healthy old man like a tower undermined, iv. 277;
  <i>History of Henry VII.</i>, v. 220;
  introduction of new doctrines, on the, iii. 11, n. 1;
  Johnson intends to edit his works, iii. 194;
  'Kings desire the end, but not the means,' v. 232, n. 4;
  <i>Life</i> by Mallet, iii. 194;
  'roughness breedeth hate,' iv. 168, n. 2;
  Sanquhar's trial, v. 103, n. 2;
  style, i. 219;
  Turks, their want of <i>Stirpes</i>, ii. 421;
  'who then to frail mortality,' &amp;c., v. 89;
  mentioned, i. 431, n. 2; ii. 53, n. 2, 158.
BACON, John, R.A., Johnson's monument, iv. 424, 444.
BADCOCK, Rev. Samuel, anecdotes of Johnson, iv. 407, n. 4;
  White's <i>Bampton Lectures</i>, iv. 443, n. 5.
BADENOCH, Lord of, v. 114.
BAGSHAW, Rev. Thomas, Johnson's letters to him, ii. 258, n. 3; iv. 351.
BAILEY, Nathan, v. 419.
BAILY, Hetty, iv. 143.
BAKER, Sir George, iv. 165, n. 3, 355.
BAKER, ——, an engraver, iv. 421, n. 2.
BAKER, Mrs., ii. 31.
<i>Bakers Biographia Dramatica</i>, iv. 37, n. 1.
<i>Baker's Chronicle</i>, v. 12.
BALDWIN, Henry, the printer, i. 10, 15; ii. 34, n. 1; iv. 321; v. 1, n. 5.
BALFOUR, John, v. 39, n. 2.
BALIOL, John, v. 204.
BALLADS, modern imitations ridiculed, ii. 212.
BALLANTYNE, Messrs., v. 253, n. 3.
BALLINACRAZY, a young man of, iii. 252.
BALLOONS, account of them, iv. 356, n. 1;
  failure of one, iv. 355-6;
  first ascent, iv. 357, n. 3;
  mere amusement, iv. 358;
  one burnt, ib.;
  paying for seats, iv. 359;
  wings, ib.;
    'do not write about the balloon,' iv. 368;
      at Oxford, iv. 378.
BALLOW, Henry, a lawyer, iii. 22.
BALMERINO, Lord, i. 180; v. 406, n. 3.
BALMUTO, Lord, v. 70, n. 1.
BALTIC, Johnson's projected tour, ii. 288, n. 3; iii. 134, 454.
BALTIMORE, Lord, iii. 9, n. 4.
BAMBALOES, v. 55, n. 1.
BANCROFT, Bishop, i. 59.
BANKS, Sir Joseph,
  admires Johnson's description of Iona, iii. 173, n, 3; v. 334 n. 1;
  letter to him, and motto for his goat, ii. 144;
    funeral, at, iv. 419;
  Literary Club, i. 479; iii. 365, 368;
  proposed expedition, ii. 147, 148; iii. 454;
    accompanies Captain Cook, v. 328, n. 2, 392, n. 6;
    account of Otaheite, v. 246.
BANKS, ——, of Dorsetshire, i. 145.
BAPTISM, by immersion, i. 91, n. 1;
    sprinkling, iv. 289;
  Barclay's <i>Apology</i> on it, ii. 458.
BAR. See LAW <i>and</i> LAWYERS.
BARBADOES, iv. 332.
<i>Barbarossa</i>, ii. 131, n. 2.
BARBAROUS SOCIETY, i. 393.
BARBAULD, Mrs., Boswell, lines on, ii. 4, n. 1;
  <i>Eighteen hundred and Eleven</i>, ii. 408, n. 3;
  genius and learning, on the want of respect to, iv. 117, n. 1;
  Johnson's style, imitation of, iii. 172;
  <i>Lessons for Children</i>, ii. 408, n. 3; iv. 8, n. 3;
  marriage and school, ii. 408;
  pupils, ib., n. 3;
  Priestley, lines, on, iv. 434;
  Richardson not sought by 'the great,' iv. 117, n. 1.
BARBER, Francis, account of him, i. 239, n. 1;
  Johnson's bequest to him, ii. 136, n. 2; iv. 284, 401, 402, n. 2, 440;
    death-bed, iv. 415, n. 1, 418;
    devotion to, iv. 370, n. 5;
    <i>Diary</i>, has fragments of, i. 27; iv. 405, n. 2; v. 427, n. 1;
    letters from: see JOHNSON, letters;
    prays with him, iv. 139;
    instructs him in religion, ii. 359; iv. 417;
    recommends him to Windham, iv. 401, n. 4;
    sends him to school, ii. 62, 115, 146;
    state after his wife's death, describes, i. 241;
  Langton, visits, i. 476, n. 1;
  Lichfield, retires to, iv. 402, n. 2;
  sea, at, i. 348;
  returns to service, i. 350;
  mentioned,  i. 235, 237; ii. 5, 214, 282, 376, 386; iii. 22, 44, 68,
92, 207, 222, 371, 400; iv. 142, 283; v. 53.
BARBER, Mrs. Francis, i. 237; v. 427, n. 1.
BARBEYRAC, i. 285.
BARCLAY, Alexander, i. 277.
BARCLAY, James, an Oxford student, i. 498; v. 273.
BARCLAY, Robert, of Ury, ancestor of Barclay the brewer, iv. 118, n. 1;
  <i>Apology for the Quakers</i>, in Paoli's library, ii. 61, n. 3;
  on infant baptism, ii. 458.
BARCLAY, Robert, the brewer, account of him, iv. 118, n. i;
  anecdote of Boswell's tablets, i. 6, n. 2;
  buys Thrale's brewery, iv. 86, n. 2;
  holds money of Johnson's, iv. 402, n. 2.
BARD, a reverend, iii. 374.
BARETTI, Joseph, account of him, i. 302; iii. 96, n. 1;
  Barber's devotion to Johnson, describes, iv. 370, n. 5;
  Boswell, dislikes, ii. 97, n. 1; v. 121;
    calls not quite right-headed, iii. 135, n. 2;
  <i>Carmen Sectilare</i>, adapts the, iii. 373;
  character by Mrs. Piozzi, ii. 57, n. 3;
    at his trial, ii. 97, n. 1;
    by Miss Burney and Malone, iii. 96, n. 1;
  conversation, ii. 57;
  copy-money in Italy, on, iii. 162;
  Davies, quarrel with, ii. 205;
  <i>Dialogues</i>, ii. 449;
  ducking-stool, describes a, iii. 287, n. 1;
  <i>Easy Lessons in Italian and English</i>, ii. 290;
  English love of melted butter and roast veal, i. 470, n. 2;
  fees in England, on, v. 90, n. 2;
  Foote's conversations, describes, iii. 185, n. 1;
  'French not a cheerful race,' ii. 402, n. 1;
  French prisoners,  i. 353, n. 2;
    foreigners in London, i. 353, n. 2;
  <i>Frusta Letteraria</i>, iii. 173;
  hatred of mankind, ii. 8;
  infidelity, ii. 8;
  <i>Italian and English Dictionary</i>, i, 353;
  Italy, revisits, i. 361; ii. 8, n. 3;
  <i>Italy, account of the Manners and Customs of</i>, ii. 57;
  Johnson, calls him a bear, ii. 66;
    charity, i. 302, n. 1;
    and Mr. Cholmondeley, iv. 345, n. 6;
    delight in old acquaintance, iv. 374, n. 4;
    in France, ii. 401, n. 3;
    habit of  musing, v. 73, n. 1;
    ignorance of character, v. 17, n. 2;
    letters from, i. 361, 369, 380;
    memory, iii. 3l8, n. 1; v. 368, n. 1;
    payment for <i>Rasselas</i>, i. 341, n. 3;
    prejudice  against foreigners, iv. 15, n. 3;
    and 'Presto's supper,' iv. 347;
    and Mrs. Salusbury, ii. 263, n. 6;
    trade was wisdom, iii. 137, n. 1;
    verse-making, ii. 15, n. 4;
    want of toleration, ii. 252, n. 1;
    want of observation, iii. 423, n. 1;
  <i>Journey from London to Genoa,</i> i. 361, n. 3, 365, n. 2;
  languages, knowledge of, i. 361-2;  ii. 386;
  London, love of, i. 371, n. 5;
  Madrid in 1760, v. 23, n. 1;
  <i>Misella's story,</i> i. 223, n. 2;
  Newgate, in, ii. 97, n. 1;
  <i>Pater Noster</i>, ignorance about the, v. 121, n. 4;
  Piozzi, Mrs., attacked by, iii. 49, n. 1, 96, n. 1;
    his brutal attack on her, iii. 49, n. 1, 96, n. 1;
  portrait at Streatham, iv. 158, n. 1;
  <i>Rasselas</i>, translates, ii. 208, n. 2;
  Reynolds's <i>Discourses</i>, translates, iii. 96;
  robbers, never met any, iii. 239, n. 1;
  Royal Academy, Secretary for Foreign Correspondence to the, ii. 97, n. 1;
  <i>Spectator</i>, effect of reading a, iv. 32;
  Thrales, projected tour to Italy with the, iii. 19, 27, n. 3,97, n. 1;
    accompanies them to Bath, iii. 6;
    hopes for an annuity from them, iii. 96, n. 1;
    money payments from them, ib., 97;
    quarrels with them, iii. 96;
    apparent reconciliation, ib., n. 1;
  Thrale's, Mr., grief for his son's death, describes, iii. 18;
    his appetite, iii. 423, n. 1;
  Thrale, Mrs., flatters, iii. 49, n. 1;
    mentions her echo of Johnson's 'beastly kind of wit,' ii. 349, n. 5;
  <i>Tolondron</i>, iv. 370, n. 5;
  <i>Travels through Spain</i>, i. 382, n. 2;
  tried for murder, ii. 94, 96-8;
  consultation for the defence, iv. 324;
  Williams, Mrs., describes, ii. 99, n. 2;
  mentioned, i. 260, 274, 278, 336.
BARKER'S Bible, v. 444.
BARNARD, Rev. Dr., Dean of Derry, afterwards Bishop of Killaloe, arbitrary
power, in favour of, iii. 84, n. 1;
  Johnson's charade on him, iv. 195;
    double-edged wit, ii. 307;
    draws up a Round-Robin to, iii. 84;
    and Garrick coming up to London, i. 101, n. 1;
    regard for him, iv. 115;
    writes verses on, iv. 115, n. 4, 431-3;
  kept his countenance, iv. 99;
  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;
  presents it with a hogshead of claret, iii. 238;
  Twalmley and Virgil, iv. 193;
  Wilkes, sarcasm on, iv. 107, n. 2.
BARNARD, Dr. (Provost of Eton), account of him, iii. 426, n. 1;
  Johnson at Mr. Vesey's, meets, iii. 425-6, ib., n. 4;
    breeding, does justice to, iii. 54, n. 1;
  mentioned, i. 449, n. 2.
BARNARD, Francis, King's librarian, ii. 33, 40;
  Johnson's letter to him, 33. n. 4.
BARNARD, Sir John, i. 503.
BARNES, Joshua, attacked by Baxter, W., v. 376;
  dedication to the Duke of Marlborough, v. 376, n. 3;
  Greek, knowledge of, iv. 19;
  Homer and Solomon identified, iv. 19, n. 2;
  Maccaronic verses, iii. 284.
BARNET, iii. 4; v. 428.
BARNEWALL, Nicholas, iii. 227, n. 3.
BARNSTON, Miss Letitia, iii. 413, n. 3.
BARON, 'the Baron and the Barrister united,' iii. 16, n. 1.
BARONET, story of a, v. 353.
BARONETS, <i>regular</i>, v. 322, n. 1.
BARRET, William, the Bristol surgeon, iii. 50.
BARRETIER, Philip, education, his, ii. 407, n. 5;
  Johnson, resemblance to, i. 71, n. 1;
  <i>Life</i>, by Johnson, i. 148, 149, n. 3;
    <i>Additions to the Life</i>, i. 153; republished, i. 161.
BARRINGTON, Hon. Daines, <i>Essay on the Migration of Birds</i>, ii. 248;
  Essex Head Club, member of the, iv. 254, 436;
  Johnson seeks his acquaintance, iii. 314;
  Observations on the Statutes, iii. 314;
  mentioned, iv. 112.
BARRINGTON, Lord, v. 77, n. 2.
BARRISTERS. See LAWYERS.
BARROW, Dr., iv. 105, n. 4.
BARROWBY, Dr., iv. 292.
BARRY, Sir Edward, M.D., <i>System of Physic</i>, iii. 34.
BARRY, James, the painter,—Burke, William, letter from, ii. 16, n. 1;
  Essex Head Club, member of the, iv. 254, 436;
  French with the Irish, contrasts the, ii. 402, n. 1;
  Johnson, compliments, iv. 224, n. 1;
    letter from, iv. 202;
    praises his pictures, iv. 224;
  Reynolds, quarrels with, iv. 436;
  women, on the employment of, ii. 362, n. 1.
BARRY, Spranger, the actor, i. 196, n. 3, 197; ii. 349, n. 6.
BARTER,—, a miller, ii. 164.
BARTOLOZZI, Francis, iii. 111; iv. 421, n. 2.
BARTON in Yorkshire, i. 239, n. 1.
BARTON, Mr. A. T., Fellow of Pembroke College, v. 117, n. 4.
<i>Bas Bleu</i>, iii. 293, n. 5; iv. 108.
BASKERVILLE, John, <i>Barclay's Apology</i>, edition of, ii. 458;
  <i>Virgil</i>, ii. 67.
<i>Bastard, The</i>, i. 166.
BASTIA, i. 119, n. 1; ii. 4, n. 1.
BAT, formation of the, iii. 342.
BATE, Rev. Henry (Sir H. Dudley), account of him, iv. 296.
BATE, James, i. 79, n. 2.
BATEMAN, Edmund, tutor of Christ Church, i. 76.
BATH, account of it, iii. 45, n. 1.
  Boswell and Johnson visit it in 1776, iii. 6;
  epigram on a religious dispute held there, iv. 289, n. 1;
  Goldsmith visits it, ii. 136;
  Gordon Riots, suffers from the, iii. 428, n. 4, 435, n. 1;
  Harington, Dr., iv. 180;
  'King of Bath,' i. 394, n. 2, 455;
  lectures, i. 394, n. 2; ii. 7, n. 4;
  Miller, Lady, ii. 336;
  musical lessons, price of, iii. 422;
  Paoli visits it, v. 1, n. 3;
  smoking in the rooms, v. 60, n. 2;
  Thrale family visits it in 1776, iii. 6;
    in 1780, iii. 421;
    Mrs. Piozzi in 1816, v. 427, n. 1;
  mentioned, iii. 441; iv. 140.
BATH, William Pulteney, Earl of, his oratory, i. 152;
  a paltry fellow, v. 339;
  'Pulnub' and 'Hon. Marcus Cato,' i. 502;
  Williams's, Sir C. H., lines on him, v. 268, n. 3;
  mentioned, iii. 239.
BATHEASTON VILLA, ii. 336.
BATHIANI, ii. 390.
BATHS, cold, i. 91, n. 1;
  medicated, ii. 99.
BATHURST, Colonel, i. 239, n. 1.
BATHURST, Dr., account of him, i. 190, 242, n. 1;
  <i>Adventurer</i>, wrote for the, i. 234, 252, 254;
  Barber, F., his father's slave, i. 239, n. 1;
  company of a new person, on the, iv. 33;
  death, i. 242, n. 1, 382;
  'hater, a very good,' i. 190, n. 2;
  Johnson, letters to, i. 242, n. 1;
    'recommended' by, i. 240, n. 5;
  medical practice, i. 242, n. 1;
  on slavery, iv. 28;
  mentioned, i. 183.
BATHURST, first Earl,
  Pope's friend, iii. 347; iv. 50;
    account of Pope's <i>Essay on Man</i>, iii. 402-3;
  speeches, i. 151, 509.
BATHURST, second Earl, Lord Chancellor; Dodd, Dr., attempts to bribe him,
iii. 139, n. 3;
  writes to him, iii. 142.
BATHURST, Lady, iii. 139, n. 3.
BATHURST, Ralph, verses to Hobbes, iv. 402, n. 2.
<i>Batrachomyomachia</i>, v. 459.
BATRACHUS, iv. 445.
BATTIE, Dr., iv. 161, n. 4.
BATTISTA ANGELONI (Dr. Shebbeare), iv. 113.
BATTLES, fighting, for a man, ii. 474.
BATTOLOGIA, v. 444.
<i>Baudius on Erasmus</i>, v. 444.
<i>Baviad and Maeviad</i>, iii. 16, n. 1.
BAXTER, Andrew, v. 81, n. 1.
BAXTER, Rev. Richard, <i>Call to the Unconverted</i>, iv. 257;
  Johnson praises all his books, iv. 226;
  Kidderminster, sermon at, iv. 226, n. 2;
  <i>Reasons of the Christian Religion</i>, iv. 237;
  rule of preaching, iv. 185;
  scruple, troubled by a, ii. 477;
  suicide, on the salvation of a, iv. 225;
  toleration, on, ii. 253;
  mentioned, i. 205; v. 89.
BAXTER, William, <i>Anacreon</i>. See ANACREON.
  Barnes, the antagonist of, v. 376;
  <i>Horace</i>, edition of, iii. 74, n. 1.
'BAYES,' character of, ii. 168; iii. 373.
BAYLE, confutation of him by Leibnitz, v. 287;
  his <i>Dictionary</i>, i. 425;
  <i>Life</i>, by Des Maizeaux, i. 29, n. 1;
  Menage, his account of, iv. 428, n. 2;
  mentioned, i. 285.
BEACH, Thomas, ii. 240, n. 4.
BEACONSFIELD, Johnson visits it in 1774, ii. 285, n. 3; v. 460;
  Mackintosh visits it in 1793, iv. 316, n. 1.
BEAR., See JOHNSON, bear.
BEAR-GARDEN 'Bruisers,' i. 111, n. 2.
BEARCROFT,—, a barrister, iii. 389, n. 4.
BEATON, Cardinal, v. 63.
BEATON, Rev. Mr., v. 227.
BEATTIE, Dr. James,
  complains of Boswell, v. 96, n. 2;
    correspondence with him, ii. 148, n. 2; v. 15-16;
  Burns, praised by, v. 273, n. 4;
  'caressed by the great,' ii. 264;
  conversation, iii. 339, n. 1; iv. 323, n. 2;
  English, describes a Scotchman's study of, i. 439, n. 2;
  English and Scotch universities compared, v. 85, n. 2;
  <i>Essay on Truth</i>, editions and translations, ii. 201, n. 3;
    a thing of the past, v. 273, n. 4;
    Goldsmith's opinion of it, ii. 201, n. 3; v. 273, n. 4;
    Johnson's opinion of it, ii. 201, 203; v. 29;
  Forbes, <i>Life</i> by, v. 25, n. 1;
  Gray, visited by, v. 16;
  hackney coaches, No. 1 and No. 1000, sees, iv. 330;
  <i>Hermit</i>, iv. 186;
  Hume, controversy with: See above, <i>Essay on Truth</i>;
  Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>, cited in, iv. 4, n. 3;
    gentler manner, speaks of, iv. 101, n. 1;
    letter from, iii. 434;
    praise of Hannah More, iii. 293, n. 5;
    regard for him, ii. 148, 149;
    his love of—, iii. 435, n. 1;
    use of wine, i. 103, n. 3;
    visits, ii. 141, n. 3, 142, 145, 203; v. 16;
  Monboddo's hatred of Johnson, iv. 273, n. 1;
  <i>Ode on Lord Hay</i>, v. 105;
  <i>original principles</i>, his, i. 471;
  Oxford degree of D.C.L., ii. 267, n. 1; v. 90, n. 1, 273, n. 4;
  pension, ii. 264, n. 2; v. 90, n. 1, 360;
  Professor at Aberdeen, ii. 141, 145; v. 15;
  Reynolds's allegorical picture of him, v. 90, n. 1, 273, n. 4;
  Robertson, compared with, ii. 195, n. 1;
  Thrale's bequest to Johnson, on, iv. 86, n. 1;
  Warburton and Strahan, anecdote of, v. 92, n. 3;
  Wilkes, meets, iv. 101;
  wine, indulges in, iv. 330, n. 4;
  mentioned, ii. 53, n. 1, 205, 259, 265-6; iii. 82, 123; iv. 332.
BEATTIE, Mrs., ii. 145, 148.
BEAUCLERK, Hon. Topham,
  account of him by Boswell and Johnson, i. 248 250;
    Burke, ii. 246, n. 1;
    Johnson, iii. 420, 424;
    Langton, ib.;
  absent-minded, i. 249, n. 1;
  Adelphi, 'box' at the, ii. 378, n. 1;
  Addison's <i>Remarks on Italy</i>, ii. 346;
  adultery, his, with Lady Bolingbroke whom he afterwards married,
ii. 246; iii. 349; v. 303;
  Baretti and Johnson's projected Italian tour, iii. 19;
  Baretti's trial, ii. 97, n. 1, 98;
  'Beau,' name of, ii. 258;
  '<i>bear</i>, like a word in a catch,' ii. 347;
  Boswell an unnatural Scotchman, calls, iii. 388;
    zealous for his election to the Literary Club, ii. 235; v. 76;
  Charles II, descended from, i. 248; iii. 390, n. 1;
  chemistry, love of, i. 250;
  children, his, iii. 420;
  conversation, i. 248; iii. 390, 425; iv. 433; v. 76;
    little affected by his travels, iii. 352, 449, 458;
  Cumberland's <i>Odes</i>, iii. 43, n. 3;
  Davies, Tom, clapping a man on the back, ii. 344;
  death, iii. 420, 424;
  dinners and suppers at his house, ii. 235. 325, 378, n. 1; iii. 354, 387;
  facility, wonderful, iii. 425;
  'frisk,' his, i. 250;
  gambling at Venice, i. 381, n. 1;
  gaming-club, account of a, iii. 23;
  Garrick's portrait, inscription on, iv. 96;
  Goldsmith and Malagrida, iv. 175, n. 1;
  health, his, ii. 292, 311; iii. 104, 417;
  Italy, tour to, i. 369, 381;
  Johnson, first acquaintance with, i. 248;
    accompanies to Cambridge, i. 487;
    affection for him, iv. 10, 99, 180;
    altercations with, iii. 281, 384;
    reconciliation, iii. 385;
    and Mme. de Boufflers, ii. 405;
    'coalition' with, i. 249;
    dress as a dramatic author, i. 200, n. 4:
    and Thomas Hervey, ii. 32;
    and a Mr. Hervey, iii. 194-6, 209-211;
    Jacobitism, i. 430;
    levee, attends, ii. 118;
    marriage, i. 96;
    pension, saying about, i. 250;
    portrait, inscription on, iv. 180;
      and the two dogs, ii. 299; v. 329;
    use of orange peel, ii. 330;
    visits him at Windsor, i. 250;
  Johnson's Court, veneration for, ii. 229;
  laboratory, his, ii. 378, n. 1;
  library, his, ii. 378, n. 1;
    sold, iii. 420, n. 4; iv. 105;
    sermons in it, ib.;
  <i>Lilliburlero</i>, effect of, ii. 347;
  Literary Club, original member of the, i. 477, 478, n. 2;
    describes it, ii. 192, n. 2, 274, n. 3;
  manner, his, acid, ii. 362, n. 2;
    lively, ii. 405; iii. 390;
  Montagu's, Mrs., <i>Essay</i>, could not read, v. 245;
  mother, his, iii. 420; v. 295;
  Muswell Hill, house at, ii. 378, n. 1;
  Pope's lines on Foster, mentioned, iv. 9;
  predominance over his company, iii. 390;
  professor in the imaginary college, v. 108;
  same one day as another, iii. 192;
  satire, love of, i. 249; 'see him again,' iv. 197;
  Smith's, Adam, talk, iv. 24, n. 2;
  Spence's <i>Anecdotes of Pope</i>, iv. 9;
  story, mode of telling a, iii. 390;
  Thrale, Mrs., hated by, i. 249, n. 1;
  truthfulness, his, v. 329, n. 1;
  wife, treatment of his, ii. 246, n. 1;
  mentioned, i. 357; ii. 318, 379; iii. 209, n. 3; iv. 27, 33, n. 3, 76,
113; v. 103, 215.
BEAUCLERK, Lady Diana, wife of Topham Beauclerk,
  account of her, ii. 246, n. 1;
  Boswell's 'apology' for her, ii. 246;
    bet with her, ii. 330;
  charming conversation, ii. 240;
  Langton's height, joke about, i. 336, n. 5;
    gives him Johnson's portrait, iv. 96;
  nurses her husband with assiduity; ii. 292;
    left guardian of his children, iii. 420.
BEAUCLERK, Lord Sidney, Topham Beauclerk's father, i. 248, n. 2.
BEAUCLERK, Lady Sydney, v. 295.
BEAUFORT, Duchess of (in 1780), iii. 425.
BEAUMONT, Francis, i. 75, n. 3.
BEAUMONT and FLETCHER, co-operation, their literary, ii. 334;
  Garrick's adaptation of <i>The Chances</i>, ii. 233, n. 4;
  Seward's edition of their plays, ii. 467.
<i>Beauties of Johnson</i>, iv. 148-151, 421, n. 2.
<i>Beauties of the Rambler</i>, i. 214.
BEAUTY, independent of utility, ii. 166; iv. 167.
BEAUX STRATAGEM, Archer quoted, v. 133, n. 1;
  acted by Garrick, iii. 52;
  Boniface praises his ale, ii. 461;
  is done good to by Latin, iii. 89, n. 2;
  Scrub, iii. 70.
BECKENHAM, iv. 313.
BECKET, T., the bookseller, ii. 294.
BECKFORD, Alderman, account of him, iii. 76, n. 2;
  Chatterton's gain by his death, iii. 201, n. 3;
  his English, iii. 76, 201;
  Lord Mayor, iii. 459;
  monument in Guildhall, iii. 201.
BEDFORD, iv. 132.
BEDFORD, fourth Duke of,
  attack on the ministry in 1766, iv. 316;
  vails, tries to abolish, ii. 78, n. 1;
  vice-roy in Ireland, ii. 130, n. 3.
BEDFORD, fifth Duke of, iii. 284; iv. 126.
BEDFORD, Hilkiah, iv. 286, n. 3.
BEDFORDSHIRE, militia, i. 307, n. 4; iii. 399.
BEDLAM, Boswell and Johnson visit it, ii. 374;
  curiosities of London, one of the, ii. 374, n. 1;
  houses built near it, iv. 208.
BEER, allowance of, to servants and soldiers, iii. 9, n. 4.
<i>Beggar's Opera. See</i> GAY, John.
BEGGARS, beg more readily from men than women, iv. 32;
  English compared with Scotch, v. 75, n. 1;
  many in want of work, iii. 401;
  their trade overstocked, iii. 401;
  mentioned, iii. 26. See ALMSGIVING.
BEHMEN, Jacob, ii. 122.
BELCHIER, John, the surgeon, iii. 57.
BELGRADE, Siege of, ii. 181.
BELIEF, attacks on it, iii. it; v. 288, n. 3.
BELL, Dr., iv. 1, n. 1.
BELL, Rev. Dr., ii. 204, n. 1.
BELL, Rev. Mr., of Strathaven, iii. 360.
BELL, Mrs., Johnson's epitaph on her, ii. 204, n. 1.
BELL, John, <i>Travels</i>, ii. 55.
BELL, John, the bookseller, <i>Lives of the Poets</i>, ii. 453, n. 2; iii. 110.
BELLAMY, Mrs., acts in Dodsley's <i>Cleone</i>, i. 325, n. 3, 326;
  Johnson, letter to, iv. 244, n. 2.
BELLEISLE, iii. 343, n. 2.
BELLEISLE, The, a man-of-war, i. 378, n. 1.
<i>Bellerophon</i>, i. 277, n. 4.
BELSHAM, William, <i>Essay on Dramatic Poetry</i>, i. 389, n. 2.
BEMBRIDGE,—, iv. 223, n. 3.
BENEDICTINES. See PARIS, BENEDICTINES.
<i>Benefit, free</i>, v. 243.
BENEVOLENCE, motive to action, iii. 48: mingled with vanity, ib.
BENEVOLISTS, The, iii. 149, n. 2.
BENGAL, iii. 134, n. 1, 233, 455.
BENNET, James, editor of Ascham's <i>Works</i>, i. 464.
BENSLEY, Robert, the actor, ii. 45.
BENSON, William, his monument to Milton, i. 227, n. 4; v. 95, n. 2.
BENTHAM, Dr. E., ii. 445.
BENTHAM, Jeremy, on convict-labour, iii. 268, n. 4;
  Shelburne's, Lord, wretched education, iii. 36, n. 1;
    fearlessness as a minister, iv. 174, n. 4.
BENTLEY, Dr., attacks, never answered,  ii. 61, n. 4; v. 174;
  Barnes's Greek, iv. 19, n. 2;
  Boyle, attacked by, v. 238, n. 1;
  Cunninghame, criticised by, v. 373;
  <i>Epistles of Phalaris</i>, iv. 443;
  <i>Horace, Comments on</i>, ii. 444; iii. 74, n. 1;
  Johnson, celebrated by, i. 153, n. 7; v. 174;
  'no man written down but by himself,' i. 381, n. 3; v. 274;
  Pope and Homer, iii. 256, n. 4;
  Preface to his edition of <i>Paradise Lost</i>, iv. 24, n. 1;
  scholarship perhaps unequalled, iv. 217;
  Scotchman, not a, ii. 363, n. 4;
  studied hard, i. 71; iv. 21; v. 316;
  verses, his, iv. 23;
  Wasse's <i>Greek Trochaics</i>, v. 445.
BENTLEY, Richard, Junior, iv. 289,  n. 1.
BERESFORD, Mrs. and Miss, iv. 283-4.
BERESFORD, Rev. Mr., iii. 284.
BERKELEY, Bishop,
  Burke's projected answer to his theory, i. 471;
  non-existence  of matter, on the, i. 471; iv. 27;
  profound scholar, ii. 132;
  'reverie,' his, iii. 165;
  Warburton's   ignorant criticism on him, v. 81, n. 1.
BERRENGER, Richard, iv. 88, 90.
BERWICK, ii. 266.
BERWICK, Duke of, Memoirs, iii. 286.
BESBOROUGH, Earl of, v. 263.
BEST, H. D.,
  Gibbon and the Duke of Gloucester, ii. 2, n. 2;
  George Langton, and his pedigree, i. 248, n. 1;
  Johnson's visit to Langton, i. 477, n. 1.
BETHUNE, Rev. Mr., v. 208.
BETTERTON, Thomas, iii. 185.
BETTESWORTH, Rev. E., i. 464, n. 2.
BETTESWORTH, Sergeant, iii. 377, n. 1.
<i>Betty Broom</i>, iv. 246.
BEWLEY, William, the Philosopher of Massingham, iv. 134.
BEZA, ii. 289.
BIAS the philosopher, iii. 312, n. 5.
BIBLE, The,
  calculation for reading it in a year, i. 72, n. 2;
  Johnson reads it through, ii. 189, n. 3;
  should be read with a commentary, iii. 58;
  subscribing it instead of the Articles, ii. 151.
<i>Bibliopole</i>, ii. 345.
<i>Bibliotheca Harleiana</i>, i. 153.
<i>Bibliotheca Literaria</i>, v. 445.
_Bibliothèque, Johnson's scheme of a, i. 283-285.
<i>Bibl. des Fées</i>, ii. 391.
<i>Bibliothèque des Savans</i>, i. 323.
BICKERSTAFF, Isaac, <i>account of him</i>, ii. 82, n. 3;
  mentioned, ii. 84.
BICKNELL, J. L., i. 315.
<i>Big</i>, Johnson's use of the word, iii. 348; v. 425.
<i>Big man</i>, ii. 14.
BIGAMY, v. 217.
<i>Bills</i>, i. 376.
BINDLEY, James, i. 15.
BINNING, Lord, ii. 186; iii. 331.
<i>Biographia Britannica</i>, first edition, iv. 272, n. 4;
  Dr. John Campbell a contributor, ii. 447;
  Johnson   asked to edit a new edition, iii. 174;
    edited by Kippis, ib.;
      account of it, ib. n. 3.
BIOGRAPHICAL CATECHISM, iv. 376.
BIOGRAPHY, authentic material difficult to get, iii. 71;
  best when autobiography, i. 25;
  can be written only by a man's intimates, ii. 166, 446; iii. 155, n. 3;
  Goldsmith's praise of it, v. 79, n. 3;
  Johnson's excellence in it, i. 256; iv. 34, n. 5;
    fondness for it, i. 425; iii. 206, n. 1; iv. 34; v. 79;
  literary, ii. 40; v. 240;
  method of writing it, i. 32;
  men should be drawn as they are, i. 31; iv. 53, 395; v. 238;
    'common cant' against it, iii. 275, n. 2;
  minute particulars to be given, i. 33;
    and peculiarities, iii. 154;
  rarely well executed, ii. 446;
  vices, how far to be mentioned, iii. 155;
  writing trifles with dignity, iv. 34, n. 5.
BIRCH, Rev. Thomas, D.D.,
  account of him by H. Walpole, i. 29, n. 2;
    by I. D'Israeli, i. 159, n. 4;
  anecdotes, full of, v. 255;
  conversation and writings, i. 159;
  correspondence with Mrs. Carter, i. 138;
    Cave, i. 139, 150-3;
    Johnson, i. 160, 226, 285;
    Earl of Orrery, i. 185;
  <i>History of the Royal Society</i>, i. 309; ii. 40, n. 2;
  Johnson's epigram to him, i. 140;
  Raleigh's smaller pieces, edits, i. 226;
  <i>Rambler</i>, anecdote of the, i. 203, n. 6;
  Society for the Encouragement of Learning, member of the, i. 153, n. 2.
BIRDS, migration of, ii. 248;
  nidification, 249.
BIRKENHEAD, Sir John, v. 57, n. 2.
BIRMINGHAM,—_Birmingham Journal, i. 85, n. 3;
  <i>Birmingham Daily Post</i>, i. 85, n. 3;
 'boobies of Birmingham,' ii. 464;
  book-shops, i. 36, 85, n. 3;
  buttons, v. 458;
  Castle Inn, i. 92, n. 1;
  cost of living in 1750, i. 103, n. 2;
  <i>Directory</i> for 1770, v. 458, n. 1;
  Edinburgh, likeness to, v. 23, n. 2;
  Hector's house, ii. 456, n. 2;
  in 1741, i. 86, n. 2;
  Johnson's head on copper coins, iv. 421, n. 2;
    reads <i>The History of Birmingham</i>, iv. 218, n. 1;
    resides there, i. 85-7, 90-6;
    visits it in 1761-2, i. 370, n. 5;
      in 1774, v. 458;
      in 1776 with Boswell, ii. 456;
      in 1781, iv. 135;
      in 1784, iv. 375;
    jealousy of the manufacturers, ii. 459, n. 1;
  Old Square, ii. 456, n. 2;
  rapid growth of population, iii. 450;
  riots of 1791, i. 86, n. 3; iv. 238, n. 1;
  Soho, ii. 459;
  St. Martin's Church, i. 90, n. 3;
  Stork Hotel, ii. 456, n. 2;
  Swan Tavern, i. 85, n. 3.
BIRNAM-WOOD, iii. 73.
BIRTH, respect for. See under BOSWELL and JOHNSON.
<i>Bis dat qui cito dat</i>, ii. 290, n. 4.
BISCAY, language of, i. 322.
BISHOP, contradicting one, iv. 274;
  House of Lords, in the, ii. 171;
  how made, ii. 352; v. 80;
  Johnson dines with two Bishops in Passion Week, iv. 88-9;
  learning, their, iv. 13;
    dulness, ib. n. 3;
  liberties taken in their presence, iv. 295;
  losses and gain by preferment, iv. 286, n. 1;
  'necessity of holding preferments <i>in commendam</i>,' iv. 118, n. 2;
  'Seven Bishops,' iv. 287;
  tippling-house, at a, iv. 75;
  a rout, ib. See HIERARCHY.
<i>Bishop</i>, a bowl of, i. 251.
BISHOP STORTFORD, ii. 62.
BISHOPRIC, resignation of a, iii. 113, n. 2.
BISMARCK, Prince, iv. 27, n. 1.
BLACK, why part of mankind is, i. 401.
<i>Black dog, the</i>, iii. 414.
BLACK-GUARDS, and red-guards, ii. 164, 251.
BLACK-LETTER BOOKS, ii. 120.
BLACKET, Sir Thomas, v. 148, n. 1.
BLACKIE'S <i>Etymological Geography</i>, v. 237, n. 3.
BLACKLOCK, Dr., blindness and poetry, i. 466;
  Hume, extolled by, iv. 186, n. 2;
    tutor to his nephew, v. 47, n. 3;
  Johnson, meets, v. 47;
    talks of scepticism, ib.;
  letter in explanation, v. 417;
  <i>Poems</i>, quotation from his, i. 334;
  mentioned, v. 394.
BLACKMORE, Sir Richard, attorney, son of an, ii. 126, n. 4;
    teaches a school, i. 97, n. 2;
  <i>Creation</i>, his, ii. 108;
  honoured too much by attacks, ii. 107;
  Johnson adds him to the <i>Lives</i>, iii. 370; iv. 35, n. 3, 54-6;
    describes himself in the <i>Life</i>, iv. 55;
    saves him from the critics, ib., n. 1;
  <i>Literary Club of Lay Monks</i>, i. 388, n. 3; v. 384, n. 2;
  supposed lines on Prince Voltiger, ii. 108;
  Swift, ridiculed by, iv. 80, n. 1.
BLACKSTONE, Sir William, <i>Borough English</i>, v. 320;
  <i>Commentaries</i> written when he had little practice, ii. 430;
  composed with the help of port wine, iv. 91;
  crown revenues, ii. 353; n. 4;
  Hackman's trial, iii. 384;
  Hawkins's <i>Siege of Aleppo</i>, approves of, iii. 259;
  House of Hanover, right of the, v. 202;
  legal succession, ii. 414, n. 2;
  Pembroke College, member of, i. 75;
  portrait in the Bodleian, iv. 91, n. 2;
  <i>stultifying</i> oneself, v. 342, n. 1.
BLACKWALL, Anthony, i. 84; iv. 311, 407, n. 4.
BLACKWELL, Thomas, <i>Memoirs of the Court of Augustus</i>, i. 309, 311.
BLACKWELL, Dr., a physician, i. 467, n. 1.
BLAGDEN, Dr., iv. 30.
BLAINVILLE, H., ii. 346.
BLAIR, Rev. Dr. Hugh, Boswell, letter to, iii. 402;
  Boswell's lowing like a cow, v. 396;
  composed slowly, v. 67;
  conversation, his, iii. 339, n. 1; v. 397, n. 3;
  <i>Dissertation on Ossian</i>, i. 396; ii. 296, 302, n. 2; iii. 50;
  Johnson, in awe of, ii. 63;
    'den,' i. 395;
    misunderstanding with, ii. 275, 278;
    record of a talk with, v. 398;
  Johnsonian style, remarks on the, iii. 172;
  <i>Lectures on Rhetoric</i>, iii. 172;
  Pope, anecdotes of, iii. 402-3;
  preached in a shamefully dirty church, v. 41;
  'Scotchman, though the dog is a,' &amp;c., iv. 98;
  <i>Sermons</i>, publication, iii. 97;
    price paid, iii. 98;
    popularity, iii. 167, n. 2, 211;
    Johnson praises them, iii. 97, 104, 109, 167, 211; iv. 98;
      but criticises the <i>Sermon on Devotion</i>, iii. 338;
  whist, learns, v. 404, n. 1;
  mentioned, ii. 53, n. 1; v. 387, 394.
BLAIR, Rev. Dr. John, iii. 402.
BLAIR, Rev. Robert, iii. 47, n. 3.
BLAIR, Robert, Solicitor-General of Scotland, iii. 47, n. 3.
<i>Blake, Life of</i>, i. 147, n. 5.
BLAKESLEY, Dean, iv. 125, n. 4.
BLAKEWAY, Rev. J., i. 15.
BLANCHARD, ——, iv. 358, n. 1.
BLANCHETTI, Marquis, ii. 390.
BLAND, J., i. 123, n. 3.
BLANEY, Mrs. Elizabeth, i. 37; iv. 372.
BLANK VERSE, Goldsmith and Gray's estimate of it, i. 427, n. 2;
  Johnson's estimate of it, i. 427; ii. 124; iv. 20, 42-3, 60;
    'verse only to the eye,' iv. 43;
    described by a shepherd, ib., n. 1.
BLASPHEMY, property in, v. 50.
BLEEDING, habit of, iii. 152, n. 3.
BLENHEIM PARK,
  Johnson had not seen it by 1773, v. 303;
    and Boswell visit it, ii. 451;
    and the Thrales, v. 458.
BLIND, distinguishing colour by the touch, ii. 190.
BLOCKHEAD, Churchill, applied to, i. 419;
    Fielding, ii. 173;
    Sterne, ib., n. 2;
    woman, a, ii. 456.
BLOIS, i. 389, n. 1.
'BLOOD,' Johnson had no pretensions to it, ii. 261;
  Boswell's pride in it, v. 51.
BLOUNT, Martha, i. 232, n. 1.
BLOXAM, Rev. Matthew, iii. 304.
BLUEBEARD, ii. 181.
BLUE-STOCKING MEETINGS, iii. 425, n. 3; iv. 108; v. 32, n. 3.
BOARS, statues of, iii. 231.
BOCCAGE, ——, ii. 390.
BOCCAGE, Mme. du, makes tea <i>à  l'Angloise</i>, ii. 403;
  her <i>Columbiade</i>, iv. 331;
  mentioned by Walpole and Grimm, ib., n. 1.
BODENS, George, iii. 428, n. 4.
BODLEIAN LIBRARY. See OXFORD.
BOERHAAVE, Herman, attacks, never answered, ii. 61, n. 4;
  executions, on, iv. 188, n. 3;
  Johnson, <i>Life</i> by, i. 140, 268, n. 2; ii. 372;
    resemblance to, iv. 430, n. 1;
  sleepless nights, iv. 384, n. 1.
BOETHIUS (Hector Bocce), favourite writer of the middle ages, ii. 127;
  Johnson translates some verses by him, i. 139;
    tries to get his portrait, iv. 265.
BOHEMIA, iii. 458.
BOHEMIAN LANGUAGE, ii. 156.
BOHEMIAN SERVANT, Boswell's. See RITTER, Joseph.
BOILEAU, corrected by Arnauld, iii. 347;
 'cultivez vos amis,' iv. 352;
  despised modern Latin poets, i. 90, n. 1;
  <i>Imitation of Juvenal</i>, i. 118;
  imitated by Murphy, i. 356, n. 1;
  'Le vainqueur des vanqueurs,' &amp;c., i. 261, n. 2;
  <i>Life by Desmaiseaux</i>, i. 29;
  on the neglect of a book, iii. 375, w.i.
BOLINGBROKE, Henry St. John, first Viscount,
  Burnet's <i>History of his Own Time</i>, ii. 213, n. 3;
  Booth's <i>Cato</i>, v. 126, n. 2;
  crown revenues, ii. 353, n. 4;
  dictionary-makers, i. 296, n. 3;
  English historians, ii. 236, n. 2;
  Garrick's <i>Ode</i>, i. 269;
  history to be read with suspicion, ii. 213, n. 3;
    authorised romance, ii. 366, n. 1;
  House of Commons, describes the, iii. 234, n. 2;
  Johnson's attack on his fame, i. 268, 330;
  Leslie and Bedford, iv. 286, n. 3;
  Mallet's edition of his <i>Works</i>, i. 268, 329, n. 3;
  Oxford, Lord, character of, iii. 236, n. 3;
  Patriot King, i. 329, n. 3;
  Pope, enmity against, i. 329;
    <i>Essay on Man</i>, share in, iii. 402-3;
    executor, iv. 51;
    friendship with, iv. 50, n. 4;
  Rome, references to, iii. 206, n. 1;
  schools, v. 85, n. 3;
  Shelburne's (Lord) character of him, i. 268, n. 3;
  Tories and Jacobites, i. 429, n. 4;
  <i>transpire</i>, iii. 343.
BOLINGBROKE, Lady, iii. 324.
BOLINGBROKE, second Viscount, ii. 246, n. 1; iii. 349, n. 3.
BOLINGBROKE, Lady, divorced from the second Viscount.
  See BEAUCLERK, Lady Diana.
BOLOGNA, ii. 195; v. 115.
BOMBAY, v. 55, n. 1.
<i>Bon Chretien</i>, v. 414, n. 2.
<i>Bon-mots</i>, instances of, iii. 322;
  'carrying' one, ii. 350.
<i>Bon Ton</i>, ii. 325.
BONAVENTURA, i. 500.
BOND, Mrs. iv. 402, n. 2.
BONES, uses of old, iv. 204;
  Johnson's horror at the sight of them, v. 169, 327.
BONIFACE in <i>The Beaux Stratagem</i>, ii. 461; iii. 89, n. 2.
BONNER, Bishop, i. 75, n. 3.
BONNETTA of Londonderry, v. 319-20.
BONSTETTEN, ——, v. 384, n. 1.
<i>Book of Discipline</i>, ii. 172.
BOOK-BINDING, i. 56, n. 2.
BOOK-TRADE, ii. 425.
BOOKS, abundance of modern, iii. 332;
  death, leaving one's books at, iii. 312;
  early printed ones, ii. 399; v. 459;
  every house supplied with them, iv. 217, n. 4;
  getting boys to have entertainment from them, iii. 385;
  high price, complaints of their, i. 438, n. 2;
  Johnson's letter on the book-trade, ii. 425;
  knowledge of the world through books, i. 105;
  talking from them, v. 378;
  looking over their backs in a library, ii. 364;
  poorest book, if the first, a prodigious effort, i. 454;
  prices at which they were sold:
    Boswell's edition of <i>Johnson's Letter to Chesterfield</i>, 105. 6d.,
i. 261, n. 1;
    Churchill's <i>Rosciad</i>, 1s., i. 419, n. 5;
    Dodsley's <i>Cleone</i>, 1s. 6d., i. 325, n. 3;
    Goldsmith's <i>Traveller</i>, 1s. 6d., i. 415;
    Johnson's <i>London</i>, 1s., i. 127, n. 3;
    <i>Marmor Norfolciense</i>, 1s., i. 143, n. 3;
    <i>Observations on Macbeth</i>, 1s., i. 175, n. 3;
    <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>, 1s., i. 193, n. 1;
    <i>Irene</i>, 1s. 6d., i. 198, n. 2;
    <i>Rambler, 2d</i>. a number, i. 209, n. 1;
    <i>Rambler</i>, 4 vols. in 12mo., 12s., i. 212, n. 3;
    <i>Dictionary</i>, 2 vols., 4l 10s., i. 290, n. 1;
    <i>Idler</i>, 2 vols., 5s., i. 335, n. 1;
    <i>Rasselas</i>, 2 vols. 12mo., 5s., i. 340, n. 3;
    <i>Journey to the Western Islands</i>, 5s., ii. 310, n. 2;
    Macpherson's <i>Iliad</i>, two guineas, ii. 298, n. 1;
    Percy's <i>Hermit of Warkworth</i>, 2s. 6d., ii. 136, n. 4;
    Pope's '1738,' 1s., i. 127, n. 3;
    Robertson's <i>Scotland</i>,  two guineas, iii. 334, n. 2;
  'quarterly-book,' the, ii. 426;
  seldom  read when given away, ii. 229;
  uncertainty of profits, iv. 121;
  variety of them to be kept about a man, iii. 193;
  Voltaire on the rapid sale of books in London, ii. 402, n. 1;
  willingly, not read, iv. 218. See READING.
BOOKSELLER, a drunken, iii. 389.
<i>Bookseller of the Last Century</i>,
  sale of <i>The Rambler</i> and <i>Rasselas</i>, ii. 208, n. 3;
  Newbery, v. 30, n. 3.
BOOKSELLERS, Boswell's vindication of them, ii. 426, n. 1;
  'Bridge, on the,' iv. 257;
  copyright case, ii. 272, n. 2;
  copyright, their honorary, iii. 370;
  improvement in their manners, i. 305, n. 1;
  Johnson's letter on the book-trade, ii. 425;
    uniform regard for them, i. 438;
    calls them liberal-minded men, i. 304; iv. 35, n. 3;
  literary property, their, iii. 110;
  London booksellers, denominated  <i>the Trade</i>, iii. 285, n. 2;
  publish Johnson's <i>Lives</i>, iii. 110;
  oppressors of genius, i. 305, n. 1;  ii. 345, n. 2;
  patrons of literature, i. 287, n. 3, 305.
BOOTH, Barton, the actor, account of  him, v. 126, n. 2;
  manager of Drurylane, v. 244, n. 2.
BOOTH, Captain, in <i>Amelia</i>, i. 249, n. 2.
BOOTHBY, Sir Brook, i. 83.
BOOTHBY, Miss Hill, Johnson's friendship for her, i. 83;
  prescription  of orange-peel, ii. 331. n. 1;
  supposed jealousy of Lord Lyttelton,  iv. 57, n. 2;
  letters to her. See JOHNSON, Letters.
BORLASE, William, <i>History of the Isles of Scilly</i>, i. 309.
BORNEO, v. 392, n. 6.
BOROUGH, corruption in a, ii. 373.
<i>Borough English</i>, v. 320.
BOSCAWEN, Hon. Mrs., iii. 331, 425; iv. 96.
BOSCOVICH, Père, ii. 125, 406.
BOSSUET, ii. 448, n. 2; v. 311.
BOSVILLE, Squire Godfrey,
  invites Johnson to meet Boswell at his house, iii. 439;
  belonged to the same club as Johnson, ib.;
  mentioned, ii. 169, n. 2; iii. 130, n. 1,  359.
BOSVILLE, Mrs., ii. 169.
BOSVILLE, Miss, ii. 169, n. 2;
  afterwards Lady Macdonald, v. 147.
BOSWELL, various spellings of it, v. 123-4.
BOSWELL FAMILY, Johnson's projected history of it, iv. 198.
BOSWELLS of Fife, ii. 413.
BOSWELL, Sir Alexander, Baronet, Boswell's eldest son,
  birth, ii. 386; iii. 86;
  at Eton College, iii. 12;
  described by Scott, v. 385, n. 1;
  killed in a duel, ii. 179. n. 3, 386, n. 2.
BOSWELL, David, a remote ancestor, ii. 413.
BOSWELL, David (Boswell's younger brother),
  devotion to Auchinleck, iii. 433;
    return to it, iii. 438;
  ill-used by Dundas, iii. 213, n. 1;
  Johnson, calls on, iii. 433-4;
  liked by him, 442;
  residence in Spain, ii. 195, n. 3; iii. 182;
    leaves in consequence of war, 433-4.
BOSWELL, David (Boswell's third son), iii. 94;
  death, iii. 106, 109.
BOSWELL, Dr., account of him, v. 394;
  Johnson, meets, v. 48;
    description of, iii. 7;
  mentioned, i. 437; iii. 116.
BOSWELL, Euphemia (Boswell's second daughter), ii. 422.
BOSWELL, JAMES.
  CHIEF EVENTS OF HIS LIFE.
  1740  Birth, October 29th, i. 147, n. 3.
  1759  Keeps an exact journal, i. 433, n. 3.
        Enters at Glasgow University, i. 465.
  1760  First visit to London, i. 385.
  1761  Publishes an <i>Elegy on the Death of an Amiable Young Lady</i>,
        and <i>An Ode to Tragedy</i>, i. 383, n. 3.
  1762  Contributes to a <i>Collection of Original Poems, ib.
        The Club at Newmarket, ib</i>.
        Second visit to London, i. 385.
  1763  <i>Critical Strictures</i>, i. 383, n. 3.
        <i>Correspondence with the Hon. Andrew Erskine, ib.</i>
        Gets to know Johnson, i. 391.
        Goes to study at Utrecht, i. 473.
  1764  &amp; 1765 Travels in Germany, Switzerland,
        and Italy, iii. 122, n. 2; 463, n. 2.
  1765  Visits Corsica, ii. 2.
  1766  Visits Paris, ii. 3.
        Returns from abroad, ii. 4.
        Visits London, ii. 4-15.
        Admitted as an Advocate, ii. 20.
  1767  Is acquainted with men of eminence, ii. 13, n. 3.
        Corresponds with the Earl of Chatham, ii. 59, n. 1.
        <i>Dorando, a Spanish Tale</i>, ii. 50, n. 4.
        <i>Essence of the Douglas Cause</i>, ii. 230.
  1768  Visits London and Oxford, ii. 46-66.
        <i>Account of Corsica</i>, ii. 46.
        Raises a subscription to send ordnance to Corsica, ii. 59, n. 1.
  1769  Visits Ireland, ii. 156, n. 3.
        Visits London, ii. 68-111.
        First visit to Streatham, ii. 77.
        Attends the Stratford Jubilee, ii. 68.
        Married, ii. 140, n. 1.
        <i>British Essays in favour of the Brave Corsicans</i>, ii. 59, n. 1.
  1770-1  Gap in his correspondence with Johnson of nearly a year and
a half, ii. 140.
  1772  Visits London, ii. 146-200.
  1773  Visits London, ii. 209-263.
        Elected a member of the Literary Club, ii. 240.
        Gets to know Burke, ib.
        Tour to the Hebrides with Johnson, ii. 266.
  1775  Visits London, ii. 311-377.
        Johnson assigns him a room in his house, ii. 375.
        Visits Wilton and Mamhead in Devonshire, ii. 371.
        Enters at the Inner Temple, ii. 375, n. 4.
        Birth of his eldest son, Alexander, ii. 386.
  1776  Disagrees with his father about the settlement of his estate,
ii. 412.
        Visits London, ii. 427-438; iii. 4-80.
        Becomes Paoli's constant guest when in London, iii. 34.
        Visits Oxford, Birmingham, Lichfield, and Ashbourne with Johnson,
ii. 438-475; iii. 1-4.
        Visits Bath, iii. 45-51.
        Introduces Wilkes to Johnson, iii. 64.
  1777  Meets Johnson at Ashbourne, iii. 136-208.
        Begins The <i>Hypochondriack</i> in the <i>London Magazine</i>,
iv. 179, n. 5.
  1778  Visits London, iii. 222-359.
        Attacked violently by Johnson, iii. 337.
        <i>The Hypochondriack</i>, iv. 179, n. 5.
  1779  Visits London (in the spring), iii. 373-394.
        Tries Johnson's friendship by a fit of silence, iii. 394.
        Visits London (in the autumn), iii. 399-411.
        Visits Lichfield and Chester, iii. 411-415.
        <i>The Hypockondriack</i>, iv. 179, n. 5.
  1780  <i>The Hypochondriack</i>, iv. 179, n. 5.
  1781  Visits London, iv. 71-118.
        Visits Southill with Johnson, iv. 118-132.
        <i>The Hypochondriack</i>, iv. 179, n. 5.
  1782  Death of his father, iv. 154.
        <i>The Hypochondriack</i>, iv. 179, n. 5.
  1783  Visits London, iv. 164-226.
        Hopes for an appointment through Burke, iv. 223.
        Ends <i>The Hypochondriack</i>, iv. 179, n. 5.
        <i>Letter to the People of Scotland on the Present State of the
Nation</i>, iv. 258.
  1784  Stops at York on his way to London, iv. 265.
        Hurries back to Ayrshire with the intention of becoming a
candidate for Parliament, ib.
        Visits London, iv. 271-339.
        Visits Oxford with Johnson, iv, 283-311.
        Johnson's death, iv. 417.
  1785  Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides, v. 2.
        <i>Letter to the People of Scotland against the attempt to
diminish the number of the Lords
        of Session</i>, iv. 173, n. 1.
  1786  Called to the English Bar, i. 2, n. 2; iv. 309, n. 5.
        First joins the Home Circuit, then  goes the Northern, lastly
returns to the Home Circuit,
        <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 341, and iii. 261, n. 2.
        Third edition of the <i>Journal of a Tour</i>, v. 4.
        Canvasses Ayrshire, iv. 220, n 4.
        Courts Lord Lonsdale, ib.
        Elected Recorder of Carlisle, <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for 1788, p. 470.
        Takes a house in Queen Anne Street West, Cavendish Square,
        <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 267.
        Takes chambers in the Inner Temple, iii. 179, n. 1.
        Death of his wife, i. 236, n. 1.
        Joins in raising a subscription for a monument to Johnson,
        <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 317.
  1790  <i>The Letter from Samuel Johnson to the Earl of Chesterfield</i>,
i. 261, n. 1.
        <i>A Conversation between George III and Samuel Johnson</i>,
ii. 34, n. 1.
        Suffers from Lord Lonsdale's brutality, ii. 179, n. 3.
  1791  <i>The Life of Samuel Johnson</i>, i. 9.
        Appointed Secretary for Foreign Correspondence to the Royal
Academy, iii. 462.
        Returns to the Home Circuit, <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 341.
  1792
  1793  Second edition of the <i>Life of Johnson</i>, i. 13.
  1794
  1795  Death, May 19th, i. 14.
BOSWELL, James,
  account of himself, i. 383, 404; iii. 416, n. 3; v. 51;
    birth, his, i. 147, n 3;
    death, i. 14;
  <i>Account of the Kirk of Scotland,</i> v. 213;
  accuracy: See below, Authenticity;
  activity, v. 52, n. 6, 168;
  Address to the King, carries an, iv. 265, 267;
  Advocate, admitted as an, ii. 20: See below, Counsel;
  affectation of distress, iv. 71, 379;
  allowance from his father of £300 a year, iii. 93, n. 1;
  Alnwick, visits, ii. 142;
  ambiguous prayer, his, iii. 391, n. 3;
  ambition, iii. 179, n. 1;
  America, ignorance of, ii. 293, 312, n. 4;
  Americans, sides with the, ii. 294, 312; iii. 205-7; iv. 81, 259;
  ancestry, Thomas Boswell, ii. 413; iv. 198;
  Veronica Sommelsdyck, v. 25, n. 2;
  Robert Bruce, ib.;
  Boswells of Balmuto, v. 70;
  anonymous mention of himself, ii. 14, 56, 84, 193, 227, n. 1, 330,
n. 2, 436, n. 1, 449, n. 1; iii. 49, n 2, 57, n. 3, 237, n. 3, 407, n. 1;
iv. 173, 274;
  antiquary, an, iii. 414, n. 3;
  archives, his, iii. 271, n. 5; 3O1, n. 1;
  army, wishes to enter the, i. 400; v. 52;
  fancies himself a military man, v. 125;
  Ashbourne, visits, iii. 127,131, 135-208;
  Auchinleck Castle, describes, i. 462; iii. 178; v. 379;
  authenticity, love of, i. 7; ii. 350, 434, n. 1; iii. 209, 299, n. 2;
iv. 83; v. 1, 419;
  avidity for delight, iii. 415;
  bar, enters at the: See below, English Bar;
  Barbauld's, Mrs., lines on him, ii. 4, n. 1;
  Baretti, dislike of, ii. 97, n. 1;
  Bath, visits, iii. 45;
  Bristol, 50;
  bear, led by a, ii. 269, n. 1;
  Beauclerk's hit at his talk, ii. 192, n. 2;
  birth-day, ii. 69, n, 3;
  birth and gentility, love of, i. 490-2; ii. 261, 328-9; v. 51, 103, 380;
  birthright, granted his father a renunciation of his, ii. 415, n. 1;
  bishops, on, iv. 75;
  'Blood:' See above, Birth and Gentility;
  boastful, iv. 193;
  Bologna, at, v. 115;
  books, slight knowledge of, ii, 360;
    Johnson buys him some, ii. 377, n. 1; iii. 86-8, 91;
  <i>Boswell</i>, all that is comprehended in, ii. 382, n. 1;
  'Boswell, Mr. James, a native of Scotland,' i. 190, n. 4;
  boy, longer than others, v. 308;
  'Bozzy,' ii. 258;
  <i>British Essays in favour of the brave Corsicans</i>, ii. 59, n. 1;
  Burke, visits, iv. 210;
  bustle, makes a, iii. 130, n. 1, 372
  Cambridge, visits, ii. 335, n. 1;
  cards, spends a night at, iii. 377;
  Carlisle, invites Johnson to meet him at, iii. 107, 118, 123, 127;
  celebrated men, acquaintance with, ii. 13; iii. 64:
    See below, Great Men;
  changefulness, wretched, iii. 193;
  character,
    Johnson's account of his, i. 474; ii 267, n. 4, 278, n. 1; v. 52;
    Paoli's, i. 6, n. 2;
    Lord Stowell's, v. 52, n. 6:
    See above, Account of himself;
  Chatham, Earl of, correspondence with the, ii. 13, n. 3, 59, n. 1;
  Chester, visits, iii. 413;
    his journal there a log-book of felicity, iii. 415;
  'Chief, my Yorkshire,' ii. 169, n. 2; iii. 130, n. 1, 439;
  children, his, ii. 265, 280, 386; iii. 366;
    blessed by a non-juring Bishop, iii. 372;
    loved by Johnson, iii. 436;
  church, not easy unless he goes to it, i. 418, n. 1;
  fondness for going, iii. 180;
    'would pray with a Dean and Chapter,' iii. 375, n. 2;
  chymistry, his intellectual, iii. 65;
  citizen of the world, a, ii. 306; v. 20;
  classical quotation apt, v. 56;
  <i>Clubable,</i> iv. 254, n. 2;
  Cocoa-tree Club, at the, v. 386, n. 1;
  <i>Collection of Original Poems</i>, i. 383, n. 3;
  collection of Scotch words, begins a, ii, 91;
    and of Scotch antiquities, ii. 92; iii. 414, n. 3;
  consecrated ground, comfort in nearness to, v. 169;
  divinely cheered by the nearness of Carlisle Cathedral, iii. 416, 417;
  consecutive paragraphs, iii. 339, n. 1; iv. 223, n. 2;
  <i>Conversation between His Most Sacred Majesty, &amp;c</i>., ii. 34, n. 1;
  <i>conspicuonsness, his</i>, iv. 248, n. 2;
  convict unjustly condemned, ii. 285;
  correspondence with Adams, i. 8; iv. 376;
    Beattie, ii. 148, n. 2; v. 15;
    Blair, iii. 402; v. 398;
    Blacklock, v. 417;
    Chatham, Earl of, ii. 13, n. 3, 59, n. 1;
    Cullen, iv. 263;
    Dempster, v. 407;
    Dilly, iii. 110;
    Elibank, Lord, v. 181;
    Forbes, Sir W., v. 413;
    Garrick, ii. 279, n. 1; iii. 371; v. 347-50, 382, n. 2;
    Hailes, Lord, i. 432; v. 406;
    Hastings, Warren, iv. 66;
    Hector, iv. 375;
    Johnson: See below, JOHNSON, and under JOHNSON;
    Langton, iii. 424;
    Monboddo, v. 74;
    Parr, iv. 47, n. 2;
    Percy, iii. 278;
    Pitt, iv. 261, n, 3;
    Rasay, v. 410-1;
    Robertson, v. 14, 32;
    Reynolds, iv. 259, n. 2;
    Thurlow, iv. 327, 336;
    Vyse, iii. 125;
    Wilkes, ii. 11, n. 3; iv. 224, n. 2;
  <i>Correspondence with the Hon. Andrew Erskine</i>, i. 383;
  <i>Corsica, Account of</i>: See CORSICA;
  Corsica, his head filled too much with it, ii. 22, 58, 59;
    his memory honoured there, ii. 3, n. 1;
    a tradition of him, ii. 451, n. 3;
  Corsicans, raises a subscription for the, ii. 59, n. 1;
  Counsel, engaged as, Douglas Cause, iii. 219, n. 2; v. 378, n. 2;
    Ecclesiastical censure case, iii. 58;
    House of Lords, before the, ii. 144, 375, n. 4, 377, n. 1; iii. 219;
    House of Commons, iii. 224; iv. 73, 259, n. 1;
    Dr. Memis's case, ii. 291;
    schoolmaster, prosecution of a, iii. 212;
    Society of Solicitors' case, iv. 128;
  country-house, takes a little, iii. 116, 128;
  Court of General Assembly, despises pleading at the, ii. 381, n. 1;
  Court of Sessions, little dull labours, ii. 381, n. 1;
  <i>Court of Session Garland</i>, i. 432, n. 3; ii. 200, n. 1;
  Courtenay's lines on him, i. 223;
  cow, lows like a, v. 396;
  cowardly caution, iii. 210-1;
  critical skill, v. 214;
  <i>Critical Strictures</i>, i. 383, n. 3, 409;
  critics 'cannot or will not understand him,' v. 259, n. 1;
  <i>Cub at Newmarket</i>, i. 383, n. 3;
  curiosity, his wise and noble, ii. 4, 59;
  Dalblair and Young Auchinleck, known as, v. 116;
  daughters, on the treatment of, ii. 420, n. 1;
  'dazzled' by Johnson and Paoli, i. 460;
  death, at times not afraid of, iii. 153;
  debts, i. 2, n. 2; ii. 275;
    paid by his father, iii. 93;
    Johnson's warnings, against incurring any, iv. 148-9, 152, 154, 163;
  dedications, his, i. 1; ii. 1, n. 2; v. 1;
  delights to talk of the state of his mind, iv. 249;
  describes visible objects with difficulty, v. 173, 219;
  desert, has wished to retire to a, ii. 75;
  Devonshire, visits, ii. 371;
  dignity, hardly possible uniformly to preserve, ii. 69, n. 3;
    acquires 'dignity in London,' 375, n. 4;
  dinners, gives admirable, ii. 59, n. 3;
    gives one to some Hebrideans and Highlanders, ii. 308, 380;
    goes without one, ii. 178;
  displays his classical learning, v. 15, n. 5;
  dissatisfaction, too much given to, iii. 225;
  <i>Dorando, A Spanish Tale</i>, ii. 50, n. 4;
  'Drawing-room' dress, his, ii. 83, n. 1;
  Dresden, visits, i. 266, n. 2;
  drudges in an obscure corner, ii. 381, n. 1;
  duel, risk of having to fight a, ii. 179, n. 3;
  early rising, difficulty of, iii. 168;
  Easter meetings with Johnson, iv. 148. n. 2;
  elated at getting Johnson to the Hebrides, v. 215;
  <i>Elegy on the Death of an Amiable Young Lady</i>, i. 383, n. 3;
  elevated by pious exercises, iv. 122;
  English Bar, enters at the Inner Temple, ii. 375, n. 4; iii. 178;
    eats his dinners, ii. 377, n. 1; iii. 45, n. 1;
    called, i. 2, n. 2; iv. 309, n. 5;
    discouraging prospects, iii. 179, n. 1;
    takes chambers, ib.;
    attends the Northern Circuit, iii. 261, n. 2;
    discussion with Johnson on the way to success at the bar, iv. 309;
  enthusiasm of mind, solemn, iii. 122, n. 2;
    to go with Captain Cook, iii. 7;
    to go to the wall of China, iii. 269;
    feudal, iii. 178; v. 223;
    genealogical, v. 379;
  envy of Dundas's success, ii. 160, n. 1;
  <i>Epistle from Menalcas to Lycidas</i>, i. 383, n. 3;
  <i>Essays</i>, his, iv. 179;
  <i>Essence of the Douglas Cause</i>, ii. 230, n. 1;
  Essex Head Club, member of the, iv. 254, n. 2;
  estate, income of his, iv. 154, n. i; 155, n. 4;
  Eumelian Club, member of the, iv. 394, n. 4;
  exact likeness, draws an, i. 486;
  executions, love of seeing, ii. 93, n. 3; iii. 384, n. 1; iv. 328;
  executors, his, iii. 301, n. 1;
  'facility of manners,' v. 19, n. 1;
  fame, ardour for literary, ii. 69, n. 3; iv. 50, n. 2;
  fancies that he is neglected, ii. 384; iii. 44, 135;
    that Johnson is ill or offended, ii. 410;
    that his wife or children are ill, iii. 4;
    at Stains Castle, v. 105;
    in a Highland inn, v. 139;
  farm, purchases a, iii. 207;
  father, his (Lord Auchinleck), death, iv. 154;
    disagreement with, i. 346, n. 2; ii. 311, n. 1; iii. 95;
      about heirs general and male, ii. 414-5; iii. 86;
      uneasy with him, i. 426;
      a timid boy in his presence, ii. 382, n. 1; iii. 93, n. 1;
      on better terms with him, iii. 93, 95, 108, 212, 368, 442;
    dulls his faculties by strong beer before him, ii. 382, n. 1;
    Johnson, reproached by him as regards, ii. 381,72. i; v. 384, n. 1;
    Johnson's advice about him, iii. 417;
    likeness to him in face, v. 84;
  feelings, avows his ardent, ii. 69;
  'fervour of Loyalty,' iii. 113;
  fees made before the House of Lords, ii. 377, n. 1;
  feudal system, love of the, ii. 177; iii. 178;
  feudal enthusiasm, his, v. 223: see SUCCESSION, male;
  forwardness, ii. 449;
  Franklin, Dr., dines with him, ii. 59, n. 3;
  Free-will, love of discussing: see FREE-WILL;
  'gab like Boswell,' v. 52, n. 4;
  Garrick, friendship with, iii. 371:
    see above, under Correspondence;
  genealogist, a, iii. 271, n. 5;
  George III, relation to, v. 379;
  ghosts, talks of, iv. 94, n. 2;
    disturbed by the cry of one, v. 237, n. 2;
    fearful of them, v. 327, n. 1;
  Gibbon, dislike of: see GIBBON, Edward;
  Glasgow University, a student of, i. 465;
  god, makes another man his, v. 129, n. 1;
  Goldsmith's lodgings, visits, ii. 182;
    takes leave of him, ii. 260;
    affected by his death, ii. 279, n. 2;
  good-nature, described by Burke, iii. 362, n. 2;
  great men, hopes from, iii. 80, n. 2;
    Burke, iv. 223, 249, n. 1, 258, n. 2;
    Lonsdale, Lord, ii. 10, n. 1; iv. 220, n. 4;
    Pembroke, Lord, ii. 371, n. 3, iii. 80, n. 2;
    Pitt, iv. 261, n. 3;
    Rockingham ministry, iv. 148;
    seeking great men's acquaintance, iii. 189; v. 215-6;
    <i>Great man</i>, really the, ii. 59, n. 3, 83, n. 1;
    quite the <i>great man</i>, iii. 396, n. 2, 413, n. 4;
  Greek, ignorance of, iii. 407;
  'Griffith, an honest chronicler as,' i. 24;
  guardians to his children, iii. 400;
  Hague, at the, v. 25, n. 2;
  Handel musical meeting, at the, iv. 283, 285-6;
  happiest days, one of his, iv. 96-7;
  Hebrides, first talk of visiting the, i. 450; ii. 291;
  <i>homme grave</i>, ii. 3, n. 1;
  Horne Tooke, altercation with, iii. 354, n. 2;
  house in Edinburgh, his, iii. 155; v. 22, n. 2;
  Hume, intimacy with, ii. 59, n. 3, 437, n. 2;
  has memoirs of him, v. 30;
  humorous vein, v. 409;
  <i>Hypochondriack, The</i>, iv. 179, n. 5;
  hypochrondria, suffers from, i. 65, n. 1, 343; ii. 381, n. 1, 423;
iii. 86-9, 215, 366, 418; iv. 379;
    pride in it, i. 65, n. 1; iii. 87, 421;
  'hypocrisy of misery,' his, iv. 71;
  idleness, i. 465;
  imaginary ills: See FANCIES;
  imagination, should correct his, iii. 363;
  independency of spirit, v. 305;
  infidelity, his, in his youth, i. 404;
    says that 'it causes <i>ennui</i>,' ii. 442, n. 1;
  infidels, keeping company  with, iii. 409;
  intellectual excesses,  iii. 416;
  'intoxicated not drunk,' ii. 436, n. 1:
    See below, WINE;
  Ireland, visits, ii. 156, n. 3;
  isthmus, compares himself to an, ii. 80;
  Italy, visits, ii. 11, 54;
  Jacobitism when a boy, i. 431, n. 1;
    associations connected with it, v. 140;
  January 30, old port and solemn talk on, iii. 371;
  Jeffrey, helped to bed by, v. 24, n. 4;
  Jockey Club, member of the, i. 383, n. 3;
  Johnson's acquaintance, makes, i. 391; ii. 349;
    and calls on him, i. 395;
      under his roof for the last time, iv. 337;
        last talk, ib.;
        last farewell, iv. 339;
    advice on his coming into his property, iv. 155;
    advises him to stay at home in 1782, iv. 155;
    affection, tries an experiment on, iii. 394-7;
    assigns him a room in his house, ii. 376; iii. 104, 222;
    company, time spent in, i. 11, n. 1;
    complains of the length of his letters, iii. 86, n. 4;
    constant respectful attention to, ii. 357;
    consulted about America by, ii. 292, 312;
    conversation reported at first with difficulty, i. 421;
    copartnership in the tour to the Hebrides with, v. 264, 278;
    <i>Custos Rotulorum</i>, offers himself as, v. 364;
    describes him as 'worthy and religious,' iii. 394;
    <i>Diary</i>, reads, iv. 405-6;
      regrets that Mrs. Boswell did not copy it, v. 53;
    differed in politics on two points only from, iii. 221; iv. 259;
    dines for the first time at the house of, ii, 215;
    drawn by him as too 'awful,' ii. 262, n. 2;
      regrets losing some of his awe, iii. 225;
    easier with him than with almost any body, iv. 194;
    encourages him to turn author, i. 410;
      not encouraged  to share reputation with, ii. 300, n. 2;
    exhorts him to plant, v. 380;
    faults, does not hide, i. 30; iii. 275, n. 2;
    firmness,  supported by, v. 154;
    gaps in correspondence with, ii. 1, 43, 116, 140; iii. 394-5;
    gives him <i>Les Pensées de Paschal</i>, iii. 380;
    gives him a thousand pounds in praise, iii. 382;
    his guest for the first time, i. 422;
    his 'Guide, Philosopher, and Friend,' iii. 6; iv. 122, 420;
    imitates, ii. 326, n. 2; iv. 1, n. 2;
    invited to  visit Scotland, ii. 51, 201, 232,264;
    joins in his bond at the Temple, ii. 375, n. 4;
    <i>Journey</i>, reads in one night, ii. 290;
      projects  a Supplement to it, ii. 300, n. 2;
    keeps him up late drinking  port, i. 434; iii. 381;
    leads, to talk, i. 6, n. 2, 398, n. 2; ii. 187;  iii. 39; v. 159,
264, 278;
    letters to, ii. 2, 20, 22, 58, 107, 139,  141, 144, 203, 269, 270,
278, 279, 283-4, 290, 293, 295, 308, 380, 386,  406, 410, 422; iii. 86,
89, 91, 101, 105, 106, 107, 116, 122, n. 2, 126, 129, 132, 209, 211,
215, 219-222, 277, 359, 371, 391, 395, 411, 415,  433, 438; iv. 259, 379,
380;
      three letters kept back, ii. 3, n. 1; iii. 118, 122;
        keeps his letters, ii. 2;
    life, would add ten of his years to, iii. 438;
    love for, iii. 105; iv. 226, 259, n. 2, 337; v. 19;
    love for him, i. 405, 434, n. 1, 450, 462; ii. 3, 70,
    iii. 145, 205, 266, 359, 375, n. 4, 377, n. i, 383-4, 411;
    iii. 80, 86, 105, 123, 135, 198, 210, 215, 216, 312, 362, 391, 413-4,
435, 439, 442; iv. 71, 81, n. 3, 166, 226, 337, 379,  380; v. 398;
    loved by him and Mrs. Thrale, ii. 427;
    monument, circular-letter about, iv. 423, n. 1;
      projected monument at Auchinleck, v. 380;
    mysterious veneration for, i. 384;
    necessity of a yearly interview with, iii. 118, 127;
    neglects to write to, iii. 394-7; iv. 380;
    offended and reconciled, ii. 107, 109;
      heated in a talk about America, iii. 205-7, 221;
      a second time, iii. 315;
      a week's separation, iii. 337;
      reconciliation, iii. 338;
      dispute about effects of vice on character, ii. 350;
      in a violent passion on Rattakin, v. 145;
      reconciliation, v. 147;
    offers to write a history of his family, iv. 198;
    pension, tries for an addition to, iv. 326-8, 336-9, 348;
    poems, projects an edition of, i. 16, n. 1; iv. 381, n. 1;
    praises him for vivacity, iii. 135, n. 2;
      good-humour, iii. 208, n. 1;
      as a travelling companion, iii. 294; v. 52;
      as one sure of a reception, v. 134, n. 2;
    proposes a meeting in 1780 with, iii. 424, 439, 441;
    proposes that they should meet one day every week, ii. 359;
iii. 122, n. 2;
    proposes weekly correspondence with, iii. 399;
    publishes without leave a letter from, ii. 3, n. 2, 46, 58;
      may publish all after—death, 60;
    recommended to a lady client by, ii. 277;
    sadness in parting with, ii. 263; iii. 196;
    says that to lose him would be a limb amputated, iv. 81,  n. 3;
    tries, by not writing, iii. 394-7;
    visits Harwich with, i. 464;
      the Hebrides, v. 1-416;
      Oxford, ii. 46;
      Oxford and the Midland Counties, ii. 438;
      Bath, iii. 45-51;
      Ashbourne, iii. 135-208;
      Southill, iv. 118-132;
      Oxford, 283-311;
    visits him ill in bed, iii. 391;
      and Wilkes together, brings, iii. 64-79;
      a successful negotiation, iii. 79;
    will, not in, iv. 402, n. 2;
    witty at his expense, i. 3; ii. 187; v. 216;
    yearly meeting with, need of a, iii. 439;
  Johnson's Court, veneration for, ii. 229;
  Journal, in his youth keeps a, i. 433;
      by the advice of Mr. Lowe, ii. 159, n, 4;
    accuracy, its, asserted, ii. 65, n. 2;
    'exact transcript of conversations,' v. 414;
      justification for keeping it, ib.;
    entries in it made in company, i. 6, n. 2; iv. 318, n. 1, 343;
      method of keeping it, v. 272;
      kept with industry, i. 5-6;
      four nights in one week given to it, i. 461-2;
      neglected, i. 6, n. 2; ii. 47, n. 2,  71, 352, n. 1, 372;
iii. 354, 375, 376; iv. 88, n. 1, l00, 110, 274, n. 5, 311;
v. 360, 374, 394, 398;
      advised by Johnson to keep one, i. 433;
    Johnson pleased with it, iii. 260;
      helps to record a conversation, ib.; v. 307;
      reminded that it is kept, iii. 439;
    kept in quarto and octavo volumes, iv. 83;
  Journal of his visit to Ashbourne, iii. 208;
    Johnson's remark on it, iii. 209, n. 3;
  Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides, extensive circulation, ii. 267;
      in spite of ridicule, iii. 190;
    editions and translation, ii. 267, n. 3; v. 3, n. 1;
      corrections made in part of first edition, v. 245, n. 2;
      passages omitted in the later editions, v. 148, n. 1, 381, n. 4,
387, n. 4, 388, n. 2, 415, n. 4;
    'an honest chronicler as Griffith,' i. 24, n. 1;
    attacks on it, v. 3;
    Johnson's life, exact picture of a portion of, v. 279;
      praised by him, i. 24, n. 1;
    motto, iii. 190, n. 1;
    read in MS. by Johnson, ii. 383, n. 2; v. 58, n. 2, 226, 245, n. 2,
262, 277, 307, 360, n. 4;
      by Mrs. Thrale, ii. 383; v. 245, n. 2;
      and Malone, v. 1;
    task of much labour, v. 227;
  juxtaposition of stories and names, iii. 40, n. 3;
  Knight-errant, feels like a, v. 355;
  knowledge at the age of twenty-five, ii. 9;
  Laird, seen as a, iv. 164;
  Lancaster Assizes, at, iii. 261, n. 2;
  Latin corrected by Johnson, ii. 20;
    defended, ii. 23;
    talked Latin in Highland houses, v. 321;
  law, ignorance of, ii. 21, n. 4; v. 108, n. 2;
    study of it, i. 400, 427;
    professor of it in the imaginary college, v. 108;
  lawyer, unwilling to become a, i. 400, 427;
  lay-patron, a, ii. 246;
  learning, praises his own, v. 52, n. 3;
  <i>Letter to the People of Scotland on the Present State of the Nation</i>
(1783), iv. 258, 260-1;
    sent to Pitt, ib., n. 3;
  <i>Letter to the People of Scotland against diminishing the number of
the Lords of Session</i> (1785),
    Burke, Edmund, mentioned, iv. 173, n. 1;
    George III, i. 219, n. 3;
    Goldsmith and Reynolds, i. 417, n. 1;
    juries judges of the law, iii. 16, n. 1;
    Lee, 'Jack,' iii. 224, n. 1;
    'Montgomerie, a true,' his wife, ii. 140, n. 1;
    Thurlow, Lord, iv. 179, n. 2;
    universal man, Boswell a very, iii. 375, n. 2;
    vanity, owns his, i. 12, n. 2;
    Whitefield, ii. 79, n. 4;
    Wilkes, iii. 64, n. 3; v. 339, n. 5;
  letters: see CORRESPONDENCE;
  letters, reasons for inserting his own, v. 16;
  Liberty and Necessity, troubled by, iv. 71;
  Lichfield, visits in 1776, ii. 461;
    shown real 'civility' there, iii. 77;
    visits it in 1779, iii. 411;
  life, reflections on, iii. 164-6;
  Life of Johnson, <i>additions</i> to it, i. 10;
    Advertisement of it in the <i>Tour to the Hebrides</i>,  v. 421;
    cancels, i. 520; ii. 2, n. 1;
    delayed by dissipation, i. 5, n. 2;
    Johnson approves of him as his biographer, i. 26; ii. 166, 217;
iii. 196; v. 312;
    'claws,' would not cut off his, i. 30, n. 4;
    death and character, how to describe his, iv. 399, n. 1;
    mode in which it is written, i. 30, n. 1;
    'new kind of libel,' iv. 30, n. 2;
    printed by H. Baldwin: see BALDWIN;
    Odyssey, like the, i. 12;
    progress and sale, i. 9, n. 3 and 10; iv. 399, n. 1;
    translated, never, v. 3, n. 1;
  likes, a man whom everybody, iii. 362;
  Literary Club, a member of the, i. 478, n. 3, 481, n. 3;
    proposed by Johnson, ii. 235; v. 76;
    elected, ii. 240;
    Johnson's charge, ib.;
    how he got in, v. 76;
    for meetings: see CLUBS, Literary;
  lodgings, his London, Downing Street, i. 422;
    Farrar's Buildings, i. 437, 463. n. 3;
    Half-Moon Street, ii. 46, n. 2; 59;
    Old Bond Street, ii. 82;
    Conduit Street, ii. 166;
    Piccadilly, 219;
    Gerrard Street, iii. 51, n. 3;
    General Paoli's in South Audley Street, iii. 35, 324;
    Inner Temple Lane, chambers in, iii. 179, n. 1;
  London, expedition to it highly improving, ii. 311, n. 1;
    increased spirits there, iii. 246;
    Johnson consulted about a visit to it, ii. 275-7;
      agrees to his removing to it, iv. 351;
  love of it, i. 463; ii. 275; iii. 5, 176, 363;
  London, visits, in 1760, i. 385;
    1762-3, i. 385-464;
    1766, ii. 4-15;
    1768, ii. 46-66;
    1769, ii. 68-111;
    1772, ii. 146-200;
    1773, ii. 209-263;
    1775, ii. 311-377;
    1776, ii. 427-475, iii. 1-80;
    (in 1777 Boswell met Johnson in Ashbourne, iii. 135-208);
    1778, iii. 222-359;
    1779, spring, iii. 373-394;
      autumn, iii. 400-411;
    1781, iv. 71-118;
    1783, iv. 164-226;
    1784 (sets out in March but turns back at York, iv. 265), 271-339;
  Lonsdale, pays court to Lord, ii. 10, n. 1;
    brutality, suffers from, ii. 179, n. 3;
  looks forward to his future worth, ii. 58, n. 3;
  loose life, his, ii. 46, n. 1, 47, n. 2, 58, n. 3, 170, 352, n. 1;
  manners, want of, ii. 475;
  manuscripts, his, destroyed by his executors, iii. 301, n. 1; 344, n. 1;
v. 30, n. 2;
  marriage, approaching, ii. 68, 70, 76, 110;
    takes place, ii. 140;
    thinks of a second one, iii. 199, n. 1;
  masquerade, at a, ii. 205;
  <i>Matrimonial Thought</i>, ii. 110;
  melancholy: see above, Hypochondria;
  military life, love of, i. 400; iii. 413, n. 4;
  mind 'somewhat dark,' ii. 381;
  'mingles vice and virtue,' ii. 246;
  mob, reported to have headed a, ii. 50, n. 4;
  Montagu, Mrs., quarrel with, iv. 64;
  mother-in-law, his, ii. 377, n. 1;
  Mountstuart, Lord, friendship with, iv. 128;
  music, made a fool of by, iii. 197-8;
  mystery, love of, iii. 225;
  and the mysterious, iv. 94, n. 2;
  Naples, at, v. 54;
  narrowness, troubled with a fit of, iv. 191;
  nature, no relish for the beauties of, i. 461;
  'never left a house without leaving a wish for his return,' iii. 412;
  newspapers, inserted notices of himself in the, ii. 46, n. 2, 71, n. 2;
  noble friend, puzzled by a, iv. 209;
  objects on the road, not observant of, iv. 311;
  <i>Ode to Tragedy</i>, i. 383, n. 3; v. 51, n. 3;
  Oglethorpe, flattered by, ii. 59, n. 1 and 3;
  old-fashioned principles, v. 131;
  'old-hock humour,' i. 383, n. 3; ii. 436, n. i;
  ostentatious, i. 465;
  Oxford, visits, in 1768, ii. 46;
    in 1776, ii. 438;
    in 1784, iv. 283-311;
  '<i>Paoli</i> Boswell,' known as, v. l23;
    'the friend of Paoli,' i. 426, n. 3; ii. 58, n. 3; 59, n. 3;
    attention to him, beautiful, iii. 51, n. 3;
    guest in London, ii. 375, n. 4; iii. 35, 51, n. 3;
    present of books to, ii. 61;
  parliament, wishes to be in, iv. 220, 267;
  perfection, periods fixed for arriving at his, ii. 46, n. 1; v. 337;
  piety, exalted in, ii. 360, n. 2;
  Pitt's neglect, complains of, iii. 213, n. 1;
    dislikes him, iii. 464;
    writes to him, iv. 261, n. 3;
  place, longing for a, i. 5, n. 2; ii. 381, n. 1;
  players, intimacy with, iii. 413, n. 4;
  plays his part admirably, iii. 413;
  'all mind, iii. 415;
  pleasing distraction, in a, iii. 256;
  political speculation, owns himself unfit for, ii. 312, n. 4;
  portrait by Reynolds, i. 2, n. 2;
  <i>Praeses</i>, elected, iv. 248;
  preached at in Inverness chapel, v. 128;
  <i>Quare adhaesit pavimento</i>, iii. 261, n. 2;
  quotations sometimes inaccurate, i. 7, n. 1;
  quotes himself, v. 204, n. 1, 348, n. 4;
    changes words, ii. 45, n. 3;
  <i>Rasselas</i>, yearly reading of, i. 342;
  read, promises Johnson to, ii. 377, n. 1, 378, n. 1;
  sat up all night reading Gray, ii. 335, n. 2;
  reads Ovid's <i>Epistles</i>, v. 295;
  reserve, practises some, i. 4; ii. 84, n. 3;
  retaliates for attacks on Johnson made by Lord Monboddo, ii. 74, n. 2;
    by Foote, ii. 95, n. 2;
  Reynolds, introduced to, i. 417, n. 1: See REYNOLDS, Boswell;
  ridicule, defies, i. 33; iii. 190;
  right-headed, said by Baretti to be not, iii. 135, n. 2;
  Rousseau, wishes to see, iii. 463, n. 2;
    visits him, ii. 11-12, 215;
    sympathy with him, ii. II, n. 3;
  Royal Academy, Secretary for Foreign Correspondence, ii. 67, n. 1;
    letters of acceptance, iii: 370, n. 1, 462-4;
    seat reserved for him at a lecture, iii. 369, n. 2;
  Rudd, Mrs., acquaintance with, ii. 450, n. 1; iii. 79-80;
  rural beauties, little taste for, i. 461; v. 112;
  Scot, 'Scarce esteemed a Scot,' i. 223;
  Scotch accents, ii. 158, 159;
  Scotticisms, corrected, iii. 432, n. 2; v. 15, n. 4;
    criticised, 425;
  Scotch shoeblack, his, ii. 326;
  Scotland, forty years' absence from it suggested to him, iii. 26;
    finds it too narrow a sphere, 176;
    its manners disagreeable to him, ii. 381, n. 1;
    vulgar familiarity of its law life, iii. 179, n. 1;
    suffers from its rudeness, ii. 381, n. 1;
  Scotchman, the one cheerful, iii. 388;
    a Scotchman without the faults of one, iii. 347;
  <i>Scots Magazine</i>, contributes to the, i. 112;
  self-tormentor, i. 470;
  Seward, controversy with Miss, i. 92, n. 2; iv. 331, n. 2;
  Shakespeare Jubilee, ii. 68;
  short-hand, uses a kind of, iii. 270;
    his long head equal to it, iv. 166;
  slavery, approves of, iii. 200, 203-5, 212;
  Smith, Adam, opinion of, ii. 430, n. 1;
    praises his facility of manners, v. 19, n. 1;
  Socrates, does not affect to be a, ii. 25;
  sophist, plays the, iii. 386;
  spy, charge of being a, ii. 383, n. 2;
  St. Paul's, Easter worship in, ii. 171, 215, 275-7, 360;
iii. 24, 316, 380; iv. 91;
  stepmother, on ill terms with his, ii. 382, n. 1; iii. 95;
  storm, among the Hebrides, in a, v. 281-2;
  studies, Johnson's advice as to his, i. 410, 457, 460, 464, 474;
  study, has a kind of impotency of, ii. 21, n. 4;
  succession, preference of male, ii. 387, n. ii, 411, n. 1, 420, n. 1;
  succession to the Barony of Auchinleck, ii. 413-23;
  superstition an enjoyment, ii. 318, n. 3; iv. 94, n. 2;
    dreams, i. 235, 236; iv. 379;
    Johnson's relief from dropsy, iv. 272:
    See above, MYSTERY, and below, GHOSTS, and SCOTLAND-HEBRIDES,
second sight;
  swearing, blameless of, ii. 166, n. 1;
  talk, not from books, v. 378;
  _tanti-man, a, iv. 112;
  Temple, enter at the Inner: See above, English Bar;
  tenants, kindness to his, iv. 155, n. 1, 163;
  tenderness, calls for, iii. 216;
  <i>Thesis</i> in Civil Law, ii. 20, 23;
  Thrale, Mrs., introduction to, ii. 77;
    her 'love' for him, ii. 145, 206, 383;
    attacked by her, iv. 318, n. 1; v. 245, n. 2;
    argument with her, iv. 72; see under, MRS. THRALE;
  Thurlow bows the intellectual knee to, iv. 179, n. 2;
  toleration, discusses, ii. 252;
  Tory, boasts of the name of, iii. 113, 375, n. 2;
    confirmed in his Toryism, iii. 392, n. 2;
  town, pleasure in seeing a new, iii. 163;
  <i>Travels,</i> wishes to publish his, iii. 300, 301, n. 1;
  truthfulness: See AUTHENTICITY;
  'universal man, a,' iii. 375, n. 2;
  'unscottified,' ii. 242;
  Utrecht, goes to, i. 400, 473;
  vanity, avows his, i. 12;
    in his youth, i. 436, n. 3;
  variety of men and manners, sees a, ii. 352, n. 1, 378, n. 1;
  Voltaire, wishes to see, iii. 463, n. 2;
    visits him, i. 434, 435, n. 2; ii. 5;
  vows, love of making, ii. 20, 24: see below, WINE, vows of sobriety;
  Walpole, Horace, calls on, iv. 110, n. 3;
    who is silent in his presence, iv. 314, n. 5;
  Warren, Dr., attended on his death-bed by, iv. 399, n. 5;
  water-drinking, tries: See below, WINE;
  welcome where-ever he goes, iii. 414;
  wife, his search of a, ii. 47, n. 2, 56, n. 2, 169, n. 2;
  wife, his, 'a true Montgomerie,' ii. 140, n. 1;
    his praise of her, v. 24;
    bargain with her, ib. n. 3;
    death, i. 236, n. 1;
    See BOSWELL, Mrs.;
  will, his, iii. 400, n. 1;
  Williams, Miss, tea with, i. 421, 463; ii. 99;
  Wilkes, dines with, ii. 378, n. 1: See under Wilkes, John;
  Wine, bruised and robbed when drunk, i. 13, n. 3;
    'intoxicated, but not drunk,' ii. 436, n. 1;
    intoxicated  at Bishop Shipley's, iv. 88, n. 1;
      at Miss Monckton's, 109;
      in Sky on punch, v. 258;
      penitent, v. 259;
      thinks it good for health, v. 260;
    Johnson advises him to drink less, ii. 377, n. 1; iv. 266; 274;
      to drink water, iii. 169;
    life shortened by his indulgence, iii. 170, n. 1;
    lover of it, a, iii. 243, n. 4; v. 156;
    nerves affected by port, i. 434, iii. 381;
    vow of sobriety under the venerable yew, ii. 381, n. 1, 436, n. 1;
      to Paoli and Courtenay, ib.;
    water-drinking, tries, iii. 170, n. 1, 328;
  wits, one of a group of, ii. 324;
  works, list of his projected, v. 91, n. 2
    (to this list should be added
    <i>An account of a projected Tour to the Isle of Man</i>, iii. 80);
  writings, early, i. 383, n. 3;
  York, at, in 1784, iv. 265, 267;
  Zelide, a Dutch lady, in love with, ii. 56, n. 2.
BOSWELL, Mrs. (the author's wife),
  Boswell praises her as 'a true Montgomerie,' ii. 140, n. 1;
    a valuable wife, iii. 160, n. 1, 416;
    she describes him as a man led by a bear, ii. 269, n. 1;
  death, i. 7, n. 2, 236, n. 1; iv. 136, n. 2;
  health, iii. 130-1, 215, 362; iv. 155;
  Johnson, feelings towards, ii. 269, n. 1, 272, 275, 379, 380, 383,
387, 411, 412, 418, 420, 422, 424; iii. 86, 93, 95, 104, 105, 210, 372,
436, 442; iv. 149, 155, 226, 264;
    hospitality to, v. 23-4, 45, 395;
    invites her to his house, iii. 216, 316;
    letter to, iv. 157. For letters from—: See JOHNSON, Letters;
    sends marmalade to, iii. 105, 108, 120, 129;
  receives a set of <i>The Lives</i> and <i>Poets,</i> iii. 372, 436;
  Scotch accent, iii. 106;
  shrewd observation, her, iii. 160, n. 1;
  travelling, dislikes, iii. 219;
  mentioned, ii. 265, 416.
BOSWELL, James, the author's second son, birth, iii. 366;
  account of him, ib. n. 1;
  educated at Westminster School, iii. 12;
  describes Malone's friendship with the Boswells, v. 1. n. 5;
  writes his father's dying letter, i. 14, n. 1;
  supplies notes to the <i>Life,</i> i. 15.
BOSWELL, Miss, ii. 378, n. 1.
BOSWELL, Robert, burnt Boswell's manuscripts, iii. 301, n. 1.
BOSWELL, Thomas (founder of the family), ii. 413; iv. 198; v. 379.
BOSWELL, Veronica, Johnson pleased with her, v. 25;
  origin of her name, ib. n. 2;
  additional fortune promised her, 26;
  death, ib. n. 1;
  her Scotch, iii. 105;
  mentioned, ii. 379; iii. 86, 93, 372.
BOSWELL, Sir W., i. 194, n. 2.
<i>Boswelliana,</i> variations in Boswell's anecdotes, i. 454, n. 1;
ii. 450, n. 4;
  story about Voltaire, iii. 301, n, 1.
BOSWORTH, i. 84; ii. 473; iv. 407, n. 4.
BOTANICAL GARDEN, iv. 128.
BOTANIST, Johnson not a, i. 377, n. 2.
"BOTTOM OF GOOD SENSE," iv. 99.
BOUCHIER, Governor, iv. 88.
BOUFFIER. See BUFFIER.
BOUFFLERS, Comtesse de, visits Johnson, ii. 118, 405;
  his letter to her, ib.;
  account of her, ib. n. 1.
BOUFFLERS, Marquise de, ii. 405, n. 1.
BOUHOURS, Dominic, ii. 90.
<i>Boulter's Monument</i>, i. 318.
BOULTON, Matthew, sells power, ii. 459;
  Johnson visits his works, v. 458.
BOUNTY HERRING-BUSSES, v. 161.
BOUNTY ON CORN. See CORN.
BOUQUET, Joseph, bookseller, i. 243,
BOURBON, House of, iv. 139, n. 4.
BOURDALOUE, ii. 241, n. 3; v. 311.
BOURDONNE, Mme. de, ii. 241, n. 3.
<i>Bouts rimés</i>, ii. 336.
BOWEN, Emanuel, <i>Complete System of Geography</i>, iii. 445.
BOWLES, William, Johnson dines with him, iv. 1, n. 1;
  visits him, iv. 234-9;
  his wife a descendant of Cromwell, iv. 235, n. 5.
BOWLES, ——, of Slains Castle, v. 106, n. 1.
BOWOOD, iv. 192, n. 2.
BOWYER, William, iv. 369, 437.
<i>Box</i>, a tradesman's, v. 291, n. 4.
BOYD, Hon. Charles, v. 97-107;
  'out in the '45,' v. 99.
BOYDS OF KILMARNOCK, v. 104.
BOYDELL, Alderman, ii. 293, n. 2.
BOYLE, family of, v. 237. See ORRERY, Earls of.
BOYLE, Hon. Hamilton, (sixth Earl of Corke and Orrery), i. 257, n. 3;
v. 238.
BOYLE, Hon. Robert, <i>Martyrdom of Theodora</i>, i. 312;
  compares argument and testimony, iv. 281, n. 3.
BOYSE, Samuel, account of him, iv. 407, n. 4, 441;
  compared with Derrick, iv. 192, n. 2.
BRADLEY in Derbyshire, i. 82, 366.
BRADSHAW, William, iv. 200, n. 2.
BRAHMINS, admit no converts, iv. 12, n. 2;
  the mastiffs of mankind, iv. 88.
BRAIDWOOD, Thomas, v. 399.
BRAITHWAITE, Mr., iv. 278.
BRAMHALL, Archbishop, ii. 104.
BRAMSTON, James, i. 73, n. 3.
BRANDY, the drink for heroes, iii. 381; iv. 79.
BRANTOME, v. 55.
'BRAVE WE,' v. 360.
<i>Bravery of the English Common Soldiers,</i> i. 335.
BRAZIL, iv. 104, n. 3;
  language, v. 242, n. 1.
BREAD TREE, ii. 248.
BREEDING, good, ii. 82; v. 82, 211, 276.
BRENTFORD, iv. 186; v. 369.
BRETT, Colonel, i. 174, n. 2.
BRETT, Mrs., i. 166, n. 4.
BRETT, Miss, i. 174, n. 2.
BRETT, Rev. Dr. Thomas, the nonjuror, iv. 287.
BREWERS, thwart the 'grand scheme of subordination,' i. 490.
BREWING in Paris, ii. 396.
  See THRALE, Henry.
BREWOOD, iv. 407, n. 4.
BREWSE, Major, v. 123-5.
BRIBERY, statutes against, ii. 339.
BRIDGENORTH, v. 455.
BRIDGEWATER, Duke of, v. 359, n. 2.
BRIGHT, John, <i>Speeches</i>, quoted, ii. 480.
BRIGHTHELMSTONE (Brighton),
  books burnt there as Popish, iii. 427, n. 1;
  Johnson describes it, iii. 92, n. 3;
  finds it very dull, iii. 93;
  does not much like it, iii. 442;
  stays there in 1782, iv. 159-60;
  other visits, iii. 452-3;
  Ship Tavern, iii. 423, n. 1;
  mentioned, iii. 45, n. 1, 397.
BRILLE, iii. 458.
BRISTOL, Boswell and Johnson's visit in 1776, iii. 50;
  bad inn, iii. 51;
  Burke its representative, iii. 378;
  Hannah More keeps a school there, iv. 341, n. 5;
  Newgate prison, Savage dies in it, i. 164;
    described by Wesley, iii. 431, n. 1;
    Dagge, the keeper, praised by Johnson, iii. 433, n. l;
    Whitefield forbidden to preach in it, ib.;
  St. Mary Redcliff, iii. 51.
BRISTOL, first Earl of, i. 106, n. 1.
BRISTOL-WELL (Clifton), iii. 45, n. 1.
BRITAIN, ancient state, iii. 333.
BRITAIN and Great Britain, Swift dislikes the names of, i. 129, n. 3.
BRITISH MUSEUM, library, iv. 105, n. 2;
  papers deposited by Boswell, ii. 297, n. 2, 307, 399, n. 2;
  mentioned, iv. 14.
<i>British Princes, The</i>, ii. 108, n. 2.
BRITON, Johnson's use of the term, i. 129, n. 3;
  George III gloried in being born one, ib.
BROADLEY, Captain, iii. 359.
BROCKLESBY, Dr., account of him, iv. 176;
  Boswell and Johnson dine with him, iv. 273;
  Essex Head Club, member of the, iv. 254;
  generosity towards Johnson and Burke, iv. 338;
  Johnson's physician in 1783-4, iv. 229, n. 2, 230-1, 245, 262-4, 267,
360, 378;
    attends his death-bed, iv. 399;
      quotes Shakespeare, iv. 400;
      Juvenal, iv. 401;
    instructed by Johnson in Christianity, iv. 414,416;
    tells him that he cannot recover, iv. 415;
    bequest from him, iv. 402, n. 2.
  For Johnson's letters to him, See JOHNSON, LETTERS.
BRODIE, Captain, i. 83, n. 4; ii. 466.
BROMLEY, i. 241; ii. 258; iv. 351-2, 394.
BROOKE, Henry, <i>Earl of Essex</i>, iv. 312, n. 5;
  <i>Gustavus Vasa</i>, i. 140;
  subscription raised for him, i. 141, n. 1.
BROOKE, Mrs., <i>Siege of Sinope</i>, iii. 259, n. 1.
BROOKS, Mrs., the actress, v. 158.
BROOKS, unchanged for ages, iii. 250.
<i>Broom's Constitutional Law</i>, iii. 87, n. 3.
BROOME, William, iii. 427; iv. 49.
<i>Broomstick, Life of a</i>, ii. 389.
BROTHERS AND SISTERS, born friends, i. 324.
BROWN, Dr. John, account of him, ii. 131, n. 2;
  <i>Athelstan</i>, ii. 131, n. 2;
  <i>Barbarossa</i>, ii. 131, n. 2;
  <i>Estimate</i>, ii. 131.
BROWN, Launcelot, (<i>Capability</i>),
  account of him, iii. 400, n. 2;
  improves Blenheim park, ii. 451;
  anecdote of Clive, iii. 401.
BROWN, Professor, of St. Andrew's, v. 64.
BROWN, Rev. Robert, of Utrecht, ii. 9; iii. 288.
BROWN, Tom, author of a spelling-book, i. 43.
BROWN, ——, Keeper of the Advocates' Library, v. 40.
BROWNE, Hawkins, iv. 272.
BROWNE, Isaac Hawkins, delightful converser, ii. 339, n. 1;
  <i>De Animi Immortalitate</i>, v. 156;
  drank freely, v. 156;
  parodied Pope, ii. 339, n. 1;
  silent in Parliament, ii. 339.
BROWNE, Patrick, <i>History of Jamaica</i>, i. 309.
BROWNE, Sir Thomas, Anglo-Latian diction, i. 221;
  'Brownism,' ib., 308;
  <i>Christian Morals</i>, i. 308;
  death, on, iii. 153, n. 1;
  'do the devils lie?' iii. 293;
  fortitude in dying, iv. 394, n. 3;
  <i>Life by Johnson</i>, i. 308, 328;
  oblivion, on, iv. 27, n. 5;
  Pembroke College, member of, i. 75, n. 3.
BROWNE, Mr., 'a luminary of literature,' i. 113, n. 1.
<i>Brownism</i>, i. 221, 308.
BRUCE, James, the traveller, ii. 333; v. 123, n. 3.
BRUCE, Robert, Boswell's ancestor, v. 25, n. 2, 379, n. 3;
  not the lawful heir to the throne, v. 204.
BRUCE, ways of spelling it, v. 123.
BRUMOY, Peter, i. 345.
BRUNDUSIUM, iii. 250.
BRUNET, ——, ii. 394.
BRUNSWICK, House of. See HANOVER, House of.
BRUTES, future life, their, ii. 54;
  misery caused them recompensed by existence, iii. 53;
  not endowed with reason, ii. 248.
BRUTUS, Marcus Junius, i. 389, n. 2.
BRUYÈRE, La, ii. 358, n. 3; v. 378.
BRYANT, Jacob, his antediluvian knowledge, v. 458, n. 5;
  Johnson's knowledge of Greek, v. 458, n. 5;
  mentioned, iv. 272; v. 303, n. 3.
BRYDGES, Sir Egerton, ii. 296, n. 1; v. 384, n. 1.
BRYDONE, Patrick, <i>Travels</i>, ii. 346;
  antimosaical remark, ii. 468; iii. 356.
<i>Bubbled</i>, v. 29. n. 6.
BUCCLEUGH, third Duke of, v. 142, n. 2.
BUCHAN, sixth Earl of, ii. 173, 177.
BUCHANAN, George, born <i>solo et seculo inerudito</i>, v. 182;
  <i>Calendae Maiae</i>, v. 398;
  <i>Centos</i>, ii. 96;
  Johnson's retort about him, iv. 185;
  learning, v. 57;
  poetical genius, i. 460; ii. 96;
  mentioned, v. 225.
<i>Buck</i>, v. 184, n. 3.
BUCKHURST, Lord, v. 52, n. 5.
BUCKINGHAM, George Villiers, second Duke of, The Rehearsal, ii. 168, n. 2;
   <i>Zimri</i>, ii, 85, n. 4.
BUCKINGHAM, Duchess of, iii. 239.
BUCKLES, iii. 325; v. 19.
BUDGELL, Eustace, calls Addison cousin, iii. 46, n. 3;
  Addison wrote his <i>Epilogue to The Distressed Mother</i>, i. 181, n. 4;
iii. 46;
    mended his <i>Spectators</i>, ib.;
  his suicide, ii. 229; v. 54.
BUDWORTH, Captain, iv. 407, n. 4.
BUDWORTH, Rev. Mr., i. 84, n. 3; iv. 407, n. 4.
BUFFIER, Claude, i. 471.
BUFFON, account of the cow shedding its horns, iii. 84, n. 2;
  his conversation, v. 229, n. 1.
<i>Builder, The</i>. King's Head, i. 191, n. 5.
<i>Bulk</i>, i. 164, n. 1, 457.
BULKELEY, Lord, v. 447.
BULKELEY, Mrs., ii. 219.
BULL, Alderman, Lord Mayor, iii. 459-60;
  attacks Lord North, iii. 460.
BULL-DOG, Dr. Taylor's, iii. 190.
BULLER, Mr., ii. 228, n. 3.
BULLER, Mrs., iv. 1, n. 1.
<i>Bulse</i>, iii. 355, n. 1.
BUNBURY, Sir Charles,
  member of the Literary Club, i. 479; ii. 274, 318;
  at Johnson's funeral, iv. 419.
BUNBURY, H.W., Burns sheds tears over one of his pictures, v. 42,
  marries Miss Horneck, i. 414, n. 1; ii. 274, n. 5.
BUNYAN, John, Johnson praises <i>The Pilgrim's Progress</i>, ii. 238;
  Franklin buys his works, iv. 257, n. 2.
BURBRIDGE, ——, i. 170 n. 5.
BURCH, Edward, R.A., iv. 421, n. 2.
BURGESS-TICKET, Johnson's, at Aberdeen, v. 90.
BURGOYNE, General, disaster to his army, iii. 355.
BURGOYNE, ——, iii. 388, n. 3.
BURIAL SERVICE, iv. 212.
BURKE, D., iv. 358, n. 1.
BURKE, Edmund, affection, on the descent of, iii. 390;
  Akerman, keeper of Newgate, praises, iii. 433;
  America, increase of population in, ii. 314, n. 3;
  American taxation, speech on, ii. 294;
  arguing on either side, on, iii. 24, n. 2;
  Bacon's <i>Essays</i>, iii. 194, n. 1;
  balloon, sees a, iv. 358, n. 1;
  Baretti's trial, gives evidence on, ii. 97, n. 1, 98;
    the consultation for the defence, iv. 324;
  Barnard's verses, mentioned in, iv. 433;
  Beaconsfield, Johnson visits it, ii. 285, n. 3;
    '<i>non equidem invideo</i>,' iii. 310;
    Gibbon mentions it, 128, n. 4;
  Beauclerk's character, draws, ii. 246, n. 1;
  Berkeley, projects an answer to, i. 472;
  Bible, on subscribing the, ii. 151, n. 3;
  Birmingham buttons, likens the Spanish Declaration to, v. 458, n. 3;
  Boswell's epithets for him, ii. 222, n. 4;
    good-nature, describes, iii. 362, n. 2; v. 76;
    hopes for place from him, iv. 223, 249, n. 1;
    <i>Life of Johnson</i>, admires, i. 10, n. 1;
    looks upon him as continually happy, iii. 5, n. 5;
    meets him for the first time, ii. 240;
    successful <i>negotiation</i>, admires, iii. 79;
    visits him, iv. 210;
  bottomless Whig, a, iv. 223;
  boy, loves to be a, iv. 79;
  Bristol, would be upon his good behaviour at, iii. 378;
  Brocklesby, Dr., gives him £1000, iv. 338, n. 2;
  'bulls enough in Ireland,' iii. 232;
  <i>Cecilia</i>, reads, iv. 223, n. 5;
  Chatham and the Woollen Act, jokes about, ii. 453, n. 2;
  Cicero or Demosthenes, not like, v. 214;
  composition, promptitude of, iii. 85;
  conversation, his, its 'affluence,' ii. 181;
    corresponds with his fame, iv. 19;
    ebullition of his mind, 167;
    never hum-drum, v. 33;
    ready on all subjects, iv. 20, 275-6;
    talk, partly from ostentation, iii. 247;
    not good at listening, v. 34;
  <i>Corycius Senex</i>, iv. 173;
  Croft's imitation of Johnson's style, iv. 59;
  definition of a free government, iii. 187;
  domestic habits, iii. 378;
  Dutch sonnet, mentions a, iii. 235;
  Dyer, Samuel, draws the character of, iv. 11, n. 1;
  Economical Reform Bill, v. 32, n. 3;
  eloquence, v. 213;
  emigration, on, iii. 231-3;
  exaggerated praise, would suffer from, iv. 82;
  extraordinary man, an, ii. 450; iv. 26, 275; v. 34;
  first man everywhere, iv. 27, n. 1; v. 269;
  Fitzherbert's character, describes, iii. 148, n. 1;
  Fox introduced into the Club, ii. 274, n. 4;
  Garrick, dines with, ii. 155, n. 2;
    epitaph on, ii. 234, n. 6;
  Glasgow professorship, seeks a, v. 369, n. 2;
  Goldsmith's college days, recollections of, iii. 168;
    and the <i>Fantoccini</i>, story of, i. 414;
    <i>Haunch of Venison</i>, mentioned in, iii. 225, n. 2;
    and <i>Retaliation</i>, i. 472; iii. 233, n. 1;
  Grenville's character, ii. 135, n. 2;
  Hamilton, engagement with, i. 519;
    estimate of him, iv. 27, n. 1;
  Hawkins, attacked by, i. 480, n. 1
  histories, his opinion of, ii. 366, n. 1;
  House of Commons, enters the, ii. 450;
    first speeches, ii. 16;
    described as the second man in it, iv. 27, n. 1;
    as the first, v. 269;
    describes it as a mixed body, iii. 234;
  Hume's partiality for Charles II, ii. 341, n. 2;
  Hussey, Rev. Dr.,  praises, iv. 411, n. 2;
  immorality, possible charge of, iv. 280, n. 1;
  'imprudent publication,' i. 463;
  <i>influence</i> of the Crown, on the, iii. 205, n. 4;
  Ireland—penal code against the Catholics, ii. 121, n. 1;
    people condemned to ignorance, ii. 27, n. 1;
    Roman Catholics the nation there, ii. 255, n. 3;
  Irish language, iii. 235;
  Johnson charges him with want of honesty, ii. 348; iii. 45;
    describes him as 'Le grand Burke,' iv. 20, n. 1;
    as 'a great man by nature,' ii. 16:
    See above, conversation, and extraordinary man;
    has a low opinion of his jocularity, iv. 276: See below, Wit;
    predicts his greatness, ii. 450;
    buys a print of him, i. 363, n. 3;
    explains the excellence of his eloquence, v. 213;
    visits him at Beaconsfield, ii. 285, n. 3; v. 460;
    in Parliament defends—, iv. 318;
    eulogises him, iv. 407, n. 3;
    funeral, at, iv. 419;
    has the greatest respect for, iv. 318;
    <i>Journey</i>, commends, iii. 137;
    last parting with, iv. 407;
    praises his work, ib., n. 3; iii. 62;
    likens him to <i>Appius</i>, iv. 374, n, 2;
    as a member of parliament, considers, ii. 138;
    joins in raising a monument to, iv. 423, n. 1;
    'oil of vitriol,' speaks of, v. 15, n. 1;
    parody of his speech, iv. 317, n. 3;
    powers, calls forth all, ii. 450;
    rings the bell to, iv. 26-7;
    roughness in conversation, iv. 280;
    sends his speech on India to, iv. 260, n, 2;
    shuns subjects of disagreement in their talk, ii. 181;
    study of Low Dutch, iv. 22;
    style, i. 88;
    at a tavern dinner, meets, i. 470, n. 2;
    Thames scolding, admires, iv. 26;
    'Why, no, Sir,' explains, iv. 316, n. 1;
  <i>Junius</i>, not, iii. 376;
  'kennel, in the,' iv. 276;
  knowledge, variety of, v. 32, 213;
  law, intended for the, v. 34;
  <i>Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol</i>, iii. 186;
  life led over again, on, iv. 303;
  Literary Club, original member, i. 477;
    attendance, ii. 16;
    mentioned by Gibbon, iii. 128, n. 4;
    name distinguished by an initial, iii. 230, n. 5;
    playful talk, iii. 238;
  'live pleasant,' i. 344;
  London, describes, iii. 178, n. 1;
  mankind, thinks better of, iii. 236;
  Middle Temple, enters at the, v. 34, n. 3;
  minority, always in the, iii. 235;
  ministry, on the pretended vigour of the, iv. 140, n. 1;
  'mire, in the,' v. 213;
  Monckton's, Miss, at, iv. 108, n. 4;
  'Mund,' ii. 528, n. 1; iii. 84, n. 2;
  '<i>mutual</i> friend,' iii. 103, n. 1;
  Newgate, visits Baretti in, ii. 97, n. 1;
  Nugent, Dr., his father-in-law, i. 477, n. 4;
  opponent, as an, ii. 450;
  'parcel of boys,' iv. 297, n. 2;
  parliament: See above, House of Commons;
  'party,' defines, ii. 223, n. 1;
  party, sticking to his, ii. 223; v. 36;
  Paymaster of the Forces, iv. 223, n. 1;
  poetry is truth rather than history, ii. 366, n. 1;
  portrait at Streatham, iv. 158, n. 1;
  Powell and Bembridge, case of, iv. 223, n. 3;
  <i>Present Discontents</i>, iii. 205, n. 4;
  professor in the imaginary college, v. 108;
  puns, on the Isle of Man, iii. 80;
    Wilkes, iii. 322; v. 32, n. 3;
    <i>modus</i> and <i>fines</i>, iii. 323;
    Deanery of Ferns, iv. 73;
    Langton, v. 32, n. 3;
    Boswell's definition of man, ib.;
  reforms the King's household expenses, iv. 368, n. 3;
  reputation in public business, ii. 16;
  retiring, talks of, iv. 223, n. 3;
  Reynolds's character, draws, i. 245, n. 3; v. 102, n. 3;
  Reynolds is his echo, ii. 222, n. 4;
    is too much under him, iii. 261;
  Robinhood Society, iv. 92, n. 5;
  Rockingham, advice to, ii. 355, n. 2;
  Royal Academy, seat reserved for him at the, iii. 369, n. 2;
  romances, loves old, i. 49, n. 2;
  Round-Robin, draws up the, iii. 83;
  should have had more sense, iii. 84, n. 2;
  same one day as another, iii. 192; v. 33;
  Shelburne speaks of him with malignity, iv. 191, n. 4;
  soldiers, on the quartering of, iii. 9, n. 4;
  son, extravagant estimate of his, iv. 219, n. 3;
  <i>Speech on Conciliation</i>, ii. 314, n. 3, 317, n. 2; iv. 317, n. 3;
  speeches too frequent and familiar, ii. 131;
    effect of them, iii. 233;
    not like Demosthenes or Cicero, v. 213-4;
  statues, on the worth of, iii. 231;
  Stonehenge, sees, iv. 234, n. 2;
  stream of mind, ii. 450;
  style censured by Johnson, iii. 186;
    and Francis, iii. 187, n. 1;
  <i>Sublime and Beautiful</i>, i. 310, 472, n. 2; ii. 90;
  subscription to the Articles, on the, ii. 150, n. 7;
  talk, his: see CONVERSATION;
  Thurlow, Lord, iv. 349, n. 3;
  Townshend, Charles, ii. 222, n. 3;
  translations of Cicero, could not bear, iii. 36, n. 4;
  understands everything but gaming and music, iv. 27, n. 1;
  Vesey's gentle manners, praises, iv. 28;
  <i>Vindication of Natural Society</i>, i. 463, n. 1;
  Virgil, his ragged Delphin, iii. 193, n. 3;
    prefers him to Homer, v. 79, n. 2;
  Whigs, quietness of the nation under the, iv. 100;
  'wild Irishmen,' v. 329;
  Wilkes on his want of taste, iv. 104;
  winds into a subject like a serpent, ii. 260;
  wit, fails at, i. 453; iii. 323; iv. 276, n. 2; v. 32, 213;
    Langton's description of it, i. 453, n. 2;
    Boswell's defence, v. 32, n. 3;
    Reynolds's, ib.;
  mentioned, i. 432, n. 3; ii. 255; iii. 305; iv. 78, 344.
BURKE, Richard, senior, Barnard's verses on Johnson, iv. 431-3.
BURKE, Richard, junior, (Edmund Burke's son),
  account of him, iv. 219, n. 3;
  at Chatsworth, iv. 367;
  Johnson, calls on, iv. 218-9;
    rebuked by, 335, n. 3;
  member of the Literary Club, i. 479.
BURKE, William, ii. 16, n. 1; v. 76, n. 3.
BURKE, William, the murderer, v. 227, n. 4.
BURLAMAQUI, ii. 430.
BURLINGTON, Lord, iii. 347; iv. 50, n. 4.
<i>Burman, Peter, Life of</i>, i. 153.
BURNET, Arthur, v. 81.
BURNET, Gilbert, Bishop of Salisbury,
  dedication to Lauderdale, v. 285;
  Hickes, George, v. 357, n. 4;
  <i>History of his own Time</i>, very entertaining, ii. 213; v. 285;
  Kincardine, Earl of, v. 25, n. 2;
  <i>Life of Hale</i>, iv. 311;
  <i>Life of Rochester</i>, iii. 191-2;
  <i>Lilliburlero</i>, effect of, ii. 347, n. 2;
  Lloyd's learning in ready cash, ii. 256, n. 3;
  Popery, controversial war on, v. 276, n. 4;
  style mere chit-chat, ii. 213;
  truthfulness, ii. 213, ib. n. 3;
  Whitby, Daniel, v. 276, n. 4.
BURNET, James. See MONBODDO, Lord.
BURNET, Thomas, v. 352, n. 2.
BURNET, Miss, v. 82, n. 1.
BURNEY, Dr. Charles, <i>Account of the Handel Commemoration</i>, iv. 361;
  Boscovitch, visits, ii. 125, n. 5;
  Boswell's <i>Life of Johnson</i>, notes to, i. 15;
  Doctor of Music, i. 285;
  Eumelian Club, member of the, iv. 394, n. 4;
  Garrick, Mrs., dines  with, iv. 96-9;
  Handel musical meeting, iv. 283, n. 1;
  <i>History of  Music</i>, ii. 409, n. 1; iii. 366-7; v. 72;
  house in St. Martin's Street, iv. 134;
  Johnson accompanies his son to Winchester, iii. 367;
    anecdotes  of, ii. 407; iv. 134;
    asks him to teach him the scale of music, ii. 263, n. 4;
    begs his  pardon, iv. 49, n. 3;
    character, draws, iii. 24, n. 2;
    character of him, ii. 407, n. 1;
    death-bed, iv. 410, n. 1, 438-9;
    funeral, 420, n. 1;
    dislike of <i>the former, the latter</i>, iv. 190, n. 2;
    first visit to his house, ii. 364, n. 3;
    house in Gough Square, i. 328;
    in the  Temple, iv. 134;
    letters: See JOHNSON, letters;
    hearth-broom, iv. 134;
    introduces him at Oxford, iii. 366-7;
    kindness, i. 410, n. 2;
    love of him, ii. 407, n. 1;
      and of his family, iii. 367, n. 4; iv. 377;
    parting with Burke, iv. 407, n. 3;
    pension, i. 375, n. 1;
    politeness, i. 286;
    praises his library, ii. 364, n. 3;
    sayings, collection of, ii. 407;
    <i>Shakespeare</i>,  i. 323, 499;
    at Streatham in 1775, ii. 406;
    talking to himself,  i. 483, n. 4;
    will, not in, iv. 402, n. 2;
  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;
  Lynne Regis, residence at, i. 285;
  <i>Musician</i>, article on, ii. 204, n. 2;
  musical scheme, a, iii. 373, n. 3;
  portrait at Streatham, iv. 158, n. 1;
  <i>Rambler</i>, sale of, i. 208, n. 3;
  Smart, Kit, kindness to, i. 306, n. 1;
  Smart's madness, i. 397;
  Streatham  library, account of, iv. 158;
  Thornton's <i>Ode</i>, i. 420, n, 2;
  Thrale, Mrs., neglected by, iv. 153, n. 4;
    rebukes her, iv. 339, n. 2;
  <i>Travels</i> ridiculed by Bicknell, i. 315, n. 4;
    praised by Johnson, iv. 186;
  mentioned, ii. 52; iii. 109, n. 1, 256.
BURNEY, Mrs., i. 328, 491, n. 3; iv. 208, 360-1.
BURNEY, Dr. Charles (jun.),
  account of Beckford's speech to the King, iii. 201, n. 3;
  Greek, knowledge of, iv 385;
  Johnson's funeral, at, iv. 420, n. 2;
    head on a seal, has, iv. 421, n. 2;
    regard for him, iv. 377; n. 1;
  studied at Aberdeen,  v. 85, n. 2.
BURNEY, Frances (Mme. D'Arblay),
  Baretti's bitterness, iii. 96, n. 1;
  Bath, at, in 1780, iii. 422-3, 428, n. 4;
  Boswell's imitation of Johnson, iv. 1, n. 2;
  Boswell meets her at Johnson's house, iv. 223;
  'Broom Gentleman, the,' iv. 134, n. 3;
  Burke, first sight of, iv. 276, n. 1;
  Burke's account of Lady Di. Beauclerk, ii. 246, n. 1;
  Burke, young, iv. 219, n. 3;
  Cambridge, R. O., iv. 196, n. 3;
  Carter, Mrs., iv. 275, n. 1;
  Cator, John, iv. 313, n. 1;
  <i>Cecilia</i>, iv. 223;
  Clerk, Sir P. J., iv. 80, n. 4;
  dates, indifferent to, iv. 88, n. 1;
  <i>downed</i>, will not be, iii. 335, n. 2;
  <i>Evelina</i> first praised by Mrs. Cholmondeley, iii. 318, n. 3;
    copy in the Bodleian, iv. 223, n. 4;
    drawings from it, 277, n. 1;
    grossness of sailors described, ii. 438, n. 2;
    not heard of in Lichfield, ii. 463, n. 4;
  Fielding and Smollett, exhilarated by, ii. 174, n. 2;
  Garrick's mimicry of Johnson, ii. 192, n. 2;
  George III compliments her, ii. 35, n. 5;
    criticises Shakespeare, i. 497, n. 1;
    popularity, iv. 165, n.. 3;
  Goldsmith's projected <i>Dictionary</i>, ii. 204, n. 2;
  Gordon Riots, iii. 428, n. 4, 435, n. 2;
  Grub Street, had never visited, i. 296, n. 2;
  Hamilton, W. G., character of, i. 520;
  Harington's <i>Nugae Antiquae,</i> iv. 180, n. 3;
  Hawkesworth's death, v. 282, n. 2;
  <i>Irene,</i> iv. 5, n. 1;
  Johnson accuses her of writing Scotch, iv. 211, n. 2;
    appearance: See JOHNSON, personal appearance;
    attacks W. W. Pepys, iv. 65, n. 1;
    benignity, ii. 141, n. 2;
    borrows a shilling of her, iv. 191, n. 1;
    at Brighton, iv. 159, n. 3;
    and Dr. Burney, friendship of, ii. 407, n. 1;
    and Burney's <i>History of Music</i>, ii. 409, n. 1;
    Cecilia, praises, iv. 163, n. 1;
    comical humour, ii. 262, n. 2;
    consulted by letter, ii. 119;
    describes Garrick's face, ii. 410, n. 1;
    eye-sight, iv. 160, n. 1;
    <i>Evelina,</i> praises, ii. 12, n. 1, 173, n. 2;
    on expectations, iv. 234, n. 2;
    Garrick, let nobody attack, iii. 312, n. 1;
    good humour and gaiety, iii. 440, n. 1; iv. 245, n. 2;
    and Greville, iv. 304, n. 4;
    grief at Thrale's death, iv. 85, n. 1;
    household, iii. 461;
    ill, iv. 163, n. 1, 256, n. 1;
      violent remedies, iii. 135, n. 1;
    'in the wrong chair,' iv. 232, n. 1;
    introduction to her, ii. 364, n. 3;
    kindliness, iv. 426, n. 2;
    kitchen, ii. 215, n. 4;
    last days, iv. 377, n. 1;
    likes an intelligent man of the world, iii. 21, n. 3;
    made or marred conversation, v. 371, n. 2;
    and Miss More, iv. 341, n. 6;
    needed drawing out, iii. 307, n. 2;
    and the newspapers, iii. 79, n. 4;
    parting with Burke, iv. 407, n. 3;
    portrait, ii. 141, n. 1;
    praises her, iv. 275;
    Mrs. Montagu, quarrels with, iv. 64, n. 1, 65, n. 1;
      urges Miss Burney to attack her, iii. 244, n. 2;
      and Miss Reynolds, i. 486, n. I;
    sight, i. 41, n. 4;
    sorrow for his bitter speeches, ii. 256, n. 1;
    at Streatham, i. 493, n. 3; iii. 451;
    style, imitates, iv. 389;
    talk, iv. 237, n. 1;
    and Mrs. Thrale, provoked by Mrs. Thrale's praise, iv. 82, n. 3;
      reproves her for flattery, v. 440, n. 2;
      drives her from his mind, iv. 339, n. 3;
    Warley Camp, returns from, iii. 361, n. 1;
    writes to, iv. 361;
  Johnson, Mrs., lodgings, iv. 377, n. 1;
  Kauffmann, Angelica, iv. 277, n. 1;
  Lade, Sir John, iv. 412, n. 1;
  Langton's imitation of Johnson, iv. 1, n. 2;
  lived to a great age, iv. 275, n. 3;
  Lowe the painter, iv. 202, n. 1;
  Macaulay, on her style, iv. 223, n. 5; iv. 389, n. 4;
  marriage, iv. 223, n. 4;
  Metcalfe, W., iv. 159, n. 2;
  Miller, Lady, ii. 336, n. 6;
  Monckton's, Miss, assemblies, iv. 108, n. 4;
  Montagu, Mrs., character of, ii. 88, n. 3; iv. 275, n. 3;
  Murphy, Arthur, described, i. 356, n. 2;
    loved by Thrale, i. 493, n. 1;
  Musgrave, Richard, ii. 343, n. 2; iv. 323, n. 1;
  Omai, iii. 8, n. 1;
  Pantheon and Ranelagh, ii. 169, n. i;
  Paoli's account of Boswell, i. 6, n. 2;
  Queen Charlotte's opinion of Boswell, i. 5, n. 1;
  <i>regale</i>, use of the word, iii. 308, n. 2;
  Reynolds's inoffensiveness, v. 102, n. 3;
    matrimonial wishes about, iv. 161, n. 5;
  Rousseau, admires, ii. 12, n. 1;
  Seward, William, iii. 123, n. 1;
  Solander, Dr., v. 328, n. 2;
  Streatham, life at, iv. 340, n. 3;
    farewell to, 158, n. 4;
  Thrale, Henry, his character, i. 494, n. 2;
    luxurious table, iii. 423, n. 1;
    stroke of apoplexy, iii. 397, n. 2;
    sale of his brewery, iv. 86, n. 2;
  Thrale, Mrs., her character, i. 494, n. 4;
    letters to her, iv. 340, n. 3;
    love of Piozzi, iv. 158, n. 4;
      rudeness to him, iv. 339, n. 2;
    want of restraint, iv. 82, n. 4;
  Vesey, Mrs., iii. 426, n. 3;
  Walker, the lecturer, iv. 206, n. 2;
  Warton, Dr. Joseph, ii. 41, n. 1;
  Warton, Rev. Thomas, iv. 7, n. 1.
BURNS, Robert, Beattie's <i>Minstrel</i>, praises, v. 273, n. 4;
  Boswell's neighbour, v. 375, n. 3;
  Dempster, R., i. 408, n. 4;
  elegy on Miss Burnet, v. 82, n. 1;
  Elphinston's <i>Martial</i>, iii. 258, n. 2;
  'gab like Boswell,' v. 52, n. 4;
  gauger, a, iv. 350, n. 1;
  'Holy Willie,' ii. 472, n. 3; iii. 449;
  Hume, attacks, v. 273, n. 4;
  Scott, seen by, v. 42, n. 1;
  <i>Tristram Shandy</i> and <i>The Man of Feeling</i>, i. 360, n. 2.
BURROW, a man near his, i. 82, n. 3; iii. 379.
BURROWES, Rev. R., iv. 385.
BURROWS, Dr., iii. 379.
BURTON, Dr. John Hill, Beattie's <i>Essay on Truth</i>, v. 273, n. 3;
  Burke, Hume and Clow, v. 369, n. 2;
  <i>Captain Carleton's Memoirs</i>, iv. 334, n. 4;
  Helvetius's advice to Montesquieu, v. 42, n. 1;
  Douglas Cause, ii. 50, n. 4;
  Hume's dislike of the English, v. 19, n. 4;
    house in James's Court, v. 22, n. 2;
    and Dr. Cheyne, iii. 27, n. 1;
    in Paris, ii. 401, n. 4;
    praise of Scotch writers, iv. 186, n. 2;
    predecessors in history, ii. 53, n. 2;
    Scotticisms, ii. 72, n. 2;
    Toryism, iv. 194, n. 1;
  King's College, Aberdeen, v. 91, n. 1;
  Scotch Militia Bill, iii. 360, n. 3.
BURTON, Robert,
  <i>Anatomy of Melancholy</i> made Johnson rise earlier, ii. 121;
    recommended by him, 440;
  'Be not solitary; be not idle,' iii. 415;
  elected student of Christ Church, i. 59.
<i>Burton's Books</i>, iv. 257.
BURTON-ON-TRENT, i. 86, n. 2.
BUSCH, Dr., iv. 27, n. 1.
BUSINESS, retiring from, ii. 337.
BUSTLING, v. 307.
<i>Busy Body</i>, i. 325, n. 3.
<i>Busy, curious, thirsty fly</i>, ii. 281.
BUTCHER, the art of a, v. 246-7.
BUTE, third Earl of,
  Adams the architect, patronises, ii. 325, n. 3;
  a book-minister, ii. 353;
  his Chancellor of the Exchequer, ii. 135, n. 2;
  concessions to the people, ii. 353;
  daughter-in-law, his, ii. 378, n. 1;
  favourite of George III, i. 386;
    and of the Princess Dowager of Wales, iv. 127, n. 3;
  <i>Humphry Clinker</i>, mentioned in, ii. 81, n. 2;
  Jenkinson, his secretary, iii. 146, n. 1;
  Johnson's letters to him, i. 376, 380;
  Johnson's pension, i. 372-377; iv. 168, n. 1;
  Luton Hoe, iv. 118;
    purchase of the estate, 127, n. 3;
  minister, when once, should not have resigned, ii. 470;
  pensions conferred by him, i. 373, n. 1;
  Scotchmen, partiality to, ii. 354;
  Scotland, never goes to, iv. 131;
  Shelburne on his strengthening the power of the Crown, iii. 416, n. 2;
  Shelburne's 'pious fraud,' iv. 174, n. 5;
  son, his, Colonel James Stuart, iii. 399;
  took down too fast, ii. 356;
  Wilkes attacks him, ii. 300, n. 5;
    dedicates to him <i>Mortimer</i>, iii. 78.
BUTE, first Marquis of. See MOUNTSTUART, Lord.
BUTLER, Bishop, <i>Analogy</i>, v. 47.
BUTLER, Samuel,
  <i>Hudibras</i>,
    bullion which will last, ii. 369;
    not a poem, iii. 38;
    shows strength of political principles, ii. 369;
    seldom read, ii. 370, n. 1;
    quotations from it:
      'H' was very shy of using it,' iii. 282, n. 1;
      'Indian Britons made from Penguins,' v. 225;
      'Jacob Behmen understood,' ii. 122, n. 6;
      'True as the dial to the sun,' iv. 296, n. 2;
      'Thou wilt at best but suck a bull,' i. 444, n. 1;
      'The Devil was the first,' &amp;c., iii. 326, n. 3;
  <i>Remains</i>, v. 57.
BUTT, Mr., i. 47, n. 1.
BUTTER, Dr., ii. 475, n, 1; iii. 1, 154, 163; iv. 110, 399, 402, n. 2.
BUTTER, Mrs., iii. 164.
BUTTON-HOLE ACT, v. 18, n. 5.
BUXTON, iii. 152; v. 432.
BYNG, Admiral,
  <i>Appeal to the People concerning</i>, i. 309, 314;
  <i>Letter on the case of</i>, i. 309;
  <i>Some further particulars by a gentleman of Oxford</i>, i. 309;
  Epitaph, his, i. 315;
  Mallet, attacked by, ii. 128;
  Voltaire's saying about him, i. 314.
BYNG, Hon. John, iv. 418.
BYRON, Captain, v. 387, n. 6.
BYRON, Lord, admires the <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>, i. 193, n. 3;
  attacked in the <i>Edinburgh Review</i>, iv. 115, n. 2;
  praises and abuses the Earl of Carlisle, iv. 113, n. 5.</p>

<h3>C.</h3>

<p>CABBAGES, ii. 455; v. 84.<br/>

CABIRI, i. 273.<br/>

CADDEL, William, of Cockenzie, ii. 302, n. 2.<br/>

CADELL, Thomas,<br/>

  Gibbon's <i>Decline and Fall</i>, publishes, ii. 136, n. 6;<br/>

    praised by him, ii. 425, n. 2;<br/>

  Hawkesworth's <i>Cook's Voyages</i>, publishes, ii. 247, n. 5;<br/>

  Hume and his opponents,<br/>

    gives a dinner to, ii. 441, n. 5;<br/>

  Johnson's <i>Journey</i>, publishes, ii. 310, n. 2;<br/>

    <i>False Alarm</i>, ii. 425, n. 2;<br/>

    one of a deputation to, iii. 111;<br/>

    asks Parr to write Johnson's <i>Life</i>, iv. 443;<br/>

  Mackenzie's <i>Man of Feeling</i>, publishes, i. 360;<br/>

  Robertson's <i>Scotland</i>, publishes, iii. 334.<br/>

<i>Cadet, The, a Military Treatise</i>, i. 309.<br/>

CADOGAN, Dr., v. 210-11.<br/>

CADOGAN, Lord, i. 12.<br/>

CAEN-WOOD, iii. 429.<br/>

CAERMARTHEN, Lord, iii. 213, n. 1.<br/>

CAESAR, Julius, i. 34.<br/>

CAIRO, iii. 134, n. i, 306, 379, n. 2, 455.<br/>

CALAIS, ii. 221, 385.<br/>

<i>Calaminaris</i>, v. 441, n. 1.<br/>

CALCULATION. See JOHNSON, calculation.<br/>

CALDER, Dr. John, ii. 212, n. 1.<br/>

CALDERWOOD, Mrs., ii. 49, n. 2.<br/>

CALDWELL, Sir James and Sir John, ii. 34, n. 1.<br/>

CALEDON, i. 185.<br/>

'CALIBAN of Literature,' ii. 129.<br/>

CALIGULA, iii. 283.<br/>

CALLANDER, Earl of, v. 103, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Called</i>, iv. 94.<br/>

CALLIMACHUS, iv. 2.<br/>

CALMING ONESELF, v. 60.<br/>

CALVINISM, v. 170, n. 1.<br/>

CALYPSO, i. 278.<br/>

CAMBRAY, ii. 401.<br/>

CAMBRICK BILL, iii. 71, n. 4.<br/>

CAMBRIDGE,<br/>

  Emmanuel College,<br/>

    Farmer, Dr., master, i. 368; ii. 449, n. 3;<br/>

    Johnson promised an habitation there, i. 517;<br/>

    strong in Shakespeare and black letter, iii. 38, n. 6;<br/>

  King's College, Steevens a member, ii. 114;<br/>

  Pembroke College, Kit Smart a Fellow, i. 306, n. 1;<br/>

  Queen's College, iv. 125;<br/>

  Trinity College, Lord Erskine a member, ii. 173, n. 1;<br/>

    Johnson spends an evening there, i. 487;<br/>

  Trinity Hall, i. 437;<br/>

  University,<br/>

    examinations for the degree, iii. 13, n. 3;<br/>

    Johnson visits it, i. 487, 517;<br/>

    Parr neglected, i. 77, n. 4;<br/>

    Professor Sanderson, ii. 190, n. 3;<br/>

  University-verses, ii. 371.<br/>

  See UNIVERSITIES.<br/>

CAMBRIDGE MEN, on Johnson's criticism of Gray, iv. 64.<br/>

<i>Cambridge Shakespeare</i>. See under SHAKESPEARE.<br/>

CAMBRIDGE, R. O.,<br/>

  Boswell's account of him, iv. 196;<br/>

    Walpole's and Miss Burney's, ib. n. 3;<br/>

  dinners at his house, ii. 225, n. 2, 361;<br/>

  Essex Head Club, member of the, iv. 254, n. 1;<br/>

  Horace, talk about, iii. 250-1;<br/>

  <i>World, The</i>, contributor to, i. 257, n. 3;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 368, 370; iv. 65, n. 1, 195.<br/>

CAMDEN, Lord, Douglas Cause, ii. 230, n. 1;<br/>

  Garrick, intimacy with, iii. 311;<br/>

  general warrants, ii. 72, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson, attacked by, ii. 314;<br/>

  Goldsmith, neglect of, iii. 311;<br/>

  Literary Club, blackballed at the, iii. 311, n. 2; iv. 75, n. <i>3</i>;<br/>

  popularity, ii. 353, n. 2;<br/>

  one of the sights of London, iv. 92, n. 5;<br/>

  Wilkes's case, judge in, ii. 353, n. 2.<br/>

CAMDEN, William, epitaph on a man killed by a fall, iv. 212;<br/>

  '<i>mira cano</i>,' iii. 304;<br/>

  Pembroke College Latin grace, i. 60, n. 4; v. 65, n. 2;<br/>

  mentioned, v. 438.<br/>

CAMERON, Dr., executed, i. 146.<br/>

CAMERON, Dugall, v. 298.<br/>

CAMERON, Ewen, v. 297.<br/>

CAMERON OF LOCHIEL, i. 146, n. 2.<br/>

CAMERONS, a branch of the, called Maclonich, v. 297.<br/>

CAMP, at Warley, iii. 360, 365;<br/>

  Coxheath, ib. n. 4;<br/>

  one of the great scenes of human life, iii. 361, n. 1.<br/>

CAMPBELL, Hon. and Rev. Archibald,<br/>

  Johnson's account of him, iv. 286; v. 356-7;<br/>

  his collection of Scotch books, ii. 216;<br/>

  <i>Doctrine of a Middle State</i>, v. 356, n. 2.<br/>

CAMPBELL, Archibald (<i>Lexiphanes</i>), ii. 44.<br/>

CAMPBELL, Colonel Sir Archibald, iii. 58.<br/>

CAMPBELL, Colonel Mure, iii. 118.<br/>

CAMPBELL, Evan, v. 141.<br/>

CAMPBELL, General, v. 55, n. 1, 259.<br/>

CAMPBELL, Dr. John, author, a rich, i. 418, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Biographia Britannica</i>, ii. 447;<br/>

  <i>Britannia Elucidata</i>, v. 323;<br/>

  cold-catching at St. Kilda, on, ii. 51;<br/>

  <i>Hermippus Redivivus</i>, i. 417; ii. 427;<br/>

  inaccurate in conversation, iii. 243-4;<br/>

  Johnson's character of him, i. 417; ii. 216; iii. 244; v. 324;<br/>

    declines to argue with, v. 324;<br/>

  never lies on paper, i. 417, n. 5;<br/>

  or with pen and ink, iii. 244;<br/>

  piety in passing a church, i. 418;<br/>

  <i>Political Survey of Great Britain</i>,<br/>

    killed by its bad success, ii. 447;<br/>

    its publication delayed, v. 324;<br/>

  Sunday evenings in Queen Square, i. 418;<br/>

  thirteen bottles of port at a sitting, iii. 243.<br/>

CAMPBELL, Rev. John (brother of Cambell of Treesbank), v. 373.<br/>

CAMPBELL, Rev. John of Kippen, ii. 28.<br/>

CAMPBELL, Lord, <i>Lives of the Chancellors</i><br/>

  Cameron's execution, i. 146, n. 2;<br/>

  Chancellors, appointment of, ii. 157, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Douglas Cause</i>, ii. 230, n. 1;<br/>

  Eldon's, Lord, attendance at Church, iv. 414, n. 1<br/>

  inaccuracy in list of Lichfield scholars, i. 45, n. 4;<br/>

  Ladd, Sir John, anecdote of, iv. 412, n. 1<br/>

  Mansfield's, Lord, speech in Somerset's case, iii. 87, n. 3;<br/>

  Radcliffe's trial, i. 180, n. 2;<br/>

  Thurlow and Horne Tooke, iv. 327, n. 4.<br/>

CAMPBELL, Mungo, account of him, iii. 188-9.<br/>

CAMPBELL, Rev. Dr. Archibald, of St. Andrews,<br/>

  <i>Enquiry into the original of Moral Virtue</i>, i. 359.<br/>

CAMPBELL, Rev. Dr. George,<br/>

  Principal of Marischal College, Aberdeen, v. 90.<br/>

CAMPBELL, Rev. Dr. Thomas,<br/>

  an Irish clergyman, account of him, ii. 338;<br/>

  Baretti's love of London, i. 371, n. 5;<br/>

  Baretti and Mrs. Thrale, iii. 49, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Diary of a visit to England</i>, ii. 338, n. 2;<br/>

  Dublin physicians, iii. 288, n. 4;<br/>

  English and Irish cottagers, ii. 130, n. 2;<br/>

  English and Scotch learning, v. 57, n. 3;<br/>

  Irish bull, guilty of an, ii. 343;<br/>

  Johnson and America, ii. 315, n. 1;<br/>

    appearance, i. 144, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>bon-mots</i>, ii. 338, n. 2;<br/>

    came from Ireland to see, ii. 342;<br/>

    dancing lessons, iv. 80, n. 2;<br/>

    introduced to, ii. 339;<br/>

      and Dr. James Foster, iv. 9, n. 5;<br/>

      and Madden, i. 318;<br/>

    suspects Burke to be <i>Junius</i>, iii. 376, n. 4;<br/>

    writings, and Reynolds's pictures, ii. 317, n. 2;<br/>

  penal code against the Papists, ii. 121, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Philosopical Survey</i>, ii. 339;<br/>

    published as an Englishman's book, iv. 320, n. 4;<br/>

  Rutty, Dr., iii. 170, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Taxation no Tyranny</i>, sale of, ii. 335, n. 4;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 349, 350; iii. 111.<br/>

CAMPBELL, ——, of Auchnaba, iii. 127, 133.<br/>

CAMPBELL,——, a factor, v. 312.<br/>

CAMPBELL, ——, a tacksman of Mull, v. 332, 340.<br/>

CAMPBELL, ——, of Treesbank, v. 372.<br/>

CAMPBELLS, ——, Mrs. Boswell's nephews, iii. 116.<br/>

CAMPBELLTOWN, ii. 183; v. 284.<br/>

CANADA, i. 307, n. 3, 428.<br/>

<i>Canal</i>, iii. 362, n. 5.<br/>

CANDIDATES FOR ORDERS, iii. 13, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Candide</i>. See VOLTAIRE.<br/>

CANNING, Miss, ii. 393, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Canons of Criticism</i>, i. 263, n. 3.<br/>

CANT, clearing the mind of it, iv. 221;<br/>

  meanings of the word, <i>ib., n</i>. 1;<br/>

  modern cant, iii. 197.<br/>

CANTERBURY, iii. 314, 457; iv. 230, n. 2.<br/>

CANTERBURY,<br/>

  Archbishops of, <i>public dinners</i>, their, iv. 367, n. 3;<br/>

  Cornwallis, Archbishop,<br/>

    Johnson's application to him, iii. 125;<br/>

  Seeker, Archbishop,<br/>

    Johnson asked to seek his patronage, i. 368.<br/>

CANUS, Melchior, ii. 391.<br/>

CANYNGE, 'a Bristol merchant,' iii. 50, n. i.<br/>

CAPEL, Lord, v. 403, n. 2.<br/>

CAPELL, Edward, editor of <i>Shakespeare</i>, iv. 5.<br/>

CAPITAL PUNISHMENTS. See EXECUTIONS, NEWGATE, and TYBURN.<br/>

CARACCIOLI, M. de, iii. 286, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Caractacus</i>, ii. 335.<br/>

<i>Card, The</i>, v. 270, n. 4.<br/>

CARDONNEL, Commissioner, iii. 390, n. 1.<br/>

CARDROSS, Lord (sixth Earl of Buchan), ii. 177.<br/>

CARDS, Johnson wishes he had learnt to play at them, i. 317; iii. 23;<br/>

v. 404;<br/>

  condemns them in the Rambler, iii. 23, n. 2.<br/>

CARELESS, Mrs., Johnson's first love, ii. 459-461;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 146-8, 378.<br/>

<i>Careless Husband</i>. See CIBBER, Colley.<br/>

CARELESSNESS, iv. 21.<br/>

CARIBS, iii. 200, n. 4.<br/>

<i>Carleton's, Captain, Memoirs</i>, iv. 333-4.<br/>

CARLISLE, Boswell proposes to meet Johnson there, iii. 107;<br/>

  'cathedral so near Auchinleck,' iii. 416-7;<br/>

  Percy made Dean, iii. 365;<br/>

  printer run out of parentheses, iii. 402, n. 1.<br/>

CARLISLE, Law, Bishop of, i. 437, n. 2.<br/>

CARLISLE, fifth Earl of, iv. 113, n. 5;<br/>

  <i>Poems</i>, iv. 113;<br/>

  <i>The Father's Revenge</i>, iv. 246-8.<br/>

CARLISLE HOUSE, iv. 92, n. 5.<br/>

CARLISLE OF LIMEKILNS, v. 316.<br/>

CARLYLE, Dr. Alexander<br/>

  Blair, Robert, iii. 47, n. 3;<br/>

  Blair's, Hugh, conversation, v. 397, n. 3;<br/>

  Cardonnel, Commissioner, iii. 390, n. 1;<br/>

  clergy (English), at Harrogate, v. 252, n. 3;<br/>

  clergy (Scotch), and card-playing, v. 404, n. 1;<br/>

  Cullen's mimicry, ii. 154, n. 1;<br/>

  Culloden—London in an uproar of joy, v. 196, n. 3;<br/>

  dinners in London and Edinburgh, i. 103, n. 2;<br/>

  Dodd, Dr., iii. 139, n. 4;<br/>

  Douglas, Duchess of, v. 43, n. 4;<br/>

  Elibank, Lord, v. 386, n. 1;<br/>

  Elphinston's school, ii. 171, n. 2;<br/>

  Guthrie, W., i. 117, n. 2;<br/>

  Home patronised by Lord Bute, ii. 354, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Douglas</i>, v. 362, n. 1;<br/>

  as an historian, iii. 162, n. 5;<br/>

  Hume, account of, v. 30, n. 1;<br/>

    opinion of <i>Ossian</i>, ii. 302, n. 2;<br/>

  Leechman's prosecution, v. 68, n. 4;<br/>

  liberality of leading clergymen, v. 21, n. 1;<br/>

  Lonsdale, Lord, v. 113, n. 1;<br/>

  Maclaurin, Professor, v. 49, n. 6;<br/>

  Macpherson, James, ii. 300, n. 1;<br/>

  Mansfield on Hume's style, i. 439, n. 2;<br/>

  Millar, Andrew, i. 287, n. 3;<br/>

  Poker Club, ii. 376, n. 1;<br/>

  Pretender, Young, v. 196, n. 2;<br/>

  Robertson and the claret, iii. 335; n. 4;<br/>

    conversation, v. 397, n. 3;<br/>

    romantic humour, iii. 335, n. 1;<br/>

  Smith, Adam, iv. 24, n. 2;<br/>

  study of English by the Scotch, i. 439, n. 2.<br/>

CARLYLE, Thomas, Cromwell's speeches, i. 150, n. 2;<br/>

  Gough Square, visits, i. 188, n. 1;<br/>

  errors about Johnson, i. 58, n. 2, 78, n. 1, 113, n. 1, 328, n. 1;<br/>

  Hénault, quotes, ii. 383, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson's god-daughter, subscribes for an annuity to, iv. 202, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Novalis</i>, quotes, iii. 11, n. 1;<br/>

  Sandwich, Lord, and Basil Montague, iii. 383, n. 3;<br/>

  teacher's life, on a, i. 85, n. 2;<br/>

  walking to Edinburgh University, v. 301, n. 2;<br/>

  writing an effort, iv. 219, n. 1.<br/>

CARMICHAEL, Miss, Johnson lodges her in his house, iii. 222;<br/>

    speaks of her as 'Poll,' iii. 368;<br/>

    describes her, iii. 461.<br/>

CARNAN, Thomas, bookseller, iii. 100, n. 1.<br/>

CAROLINE, QUEEN, Clarke's refusal of a bishopric, iii. 248, n. 2;<br/>

  Leibnitz, patronizes, v. 287;<br/>

  Savage, bounty to, i. 125, n. 4, 173, n. 3.<br/>

CARPENTER, anecdote of a, iv. 116.<br/>

CARRE, Rev. Mr., v. 27-8.<br/>

CARRUTHERS, Robert, Highland emigration, v. 150, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Carstares' State Papers</i>, v. 227, n. 4.<br/>

CARTE, Thomas, believed in the 'regal touch,' i. 42;<br/>

  <i>History of England</i>, i. 42; ii. 344; iv. 311;<br/>

  <i>Life of Ormond</i>, v. 296.<br/>

CARTER, Rev. Dr., i. 122, n. 4.<br/>

CARTER, Miss Elizabeth (Mrs.), account of her, i. 122, n. 4;<br/>

  age, lived to a great, iv. 275, n. 3;<br/>

  alarum, her, iii. 168;<br/>

  <i>Amelia</i>, praises, iii. 43, n. 2;<br/>

  Burney, Miss, described by, iv. 275, n. 1;<br/>

  her <i>Correspondence</i>, i. 203, n. 5;<br/>

  Crousaz's <i>Examen</i>, translates, i. 138;<br/>

  Garrick, Mrs., dines with, iv. 96-9;<br/>

  Greek and pudding-making, i. 122, n. 4;<br/>

  Johnson advises her to translate <i>Boethius</i>, i. 139;<br/>

    writes an epigram to her, i. 122, 140;<br/>

    English verses, ib.;<br/>

    a letter, i. 122, n. 4;<br/>

    praises her, iv. 275;<br/>

  known as 'the learned,' iv. 246, n. 6;<br/>

  <i>Ode to Melancholy</i>, i. 122, n. 4;<br/>

  _Rambler, contributes to the, i. 203;<br/>

    criticises it, i. 208, n. 3;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 242.<br/>

CARTER,—, a riding-school master, ii. 424, n. 1.<br/>

CARTERET, John, Lord, afterwards Earl Granville, i. 507, 509.<br/>

<i>Carteret</i>, a dactyl, iv. 3.<br/>

CARTHAGE, iv. 196.<br/>

CARTHAGENA, v. 386.<br/>

CARTHUSIAN CONVENT. See MONASTERY.<br/>

CASCADES, v. 429, n. 4, 442.<br/>

CASHIOBURY, i. 381, n. 1.<br/>

CASIMIR'S <i>Ode to Pope Urban</i>, i. 13, n. 2.<br/>

CASTES OF THE HINDOOS, iv. 12, n. 2, 88.<br/>

CASTIGLIONE, author of <i>Il Corteggiano</i>, v. 276.<br/>

CASTIGLIONE, Prince Gonzaga di, iii. 411, n. 1.<br/>

CASTLE, shut up in one, ii. 100.<br/>

CASUISTRY, i. 254.<br/>

CATALOGUE of Johnson's <i>Works</i>, i. 16.<br/>

CATALOGUES, why we look at them, ii. 365.<br/>

CATCOT, George, iii. 50-1.<br/>

CATHCART, Lord, ii. 413; iii. 346.<br/>

CATHEDRALS of England, most seen by Johnson, iii. 107, 456;<br/>

  neglected, v. 114, n. 1.<br/>

CATHERINE II, Empress of Russia,<br/>

  Boswell's eulogium on her, iii. 134, n. 1;<br/>

  engages English tutors, iv. 277, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Evelina</i>, has drawings made from, iv. 277, n. 1;<br/>

  Houghton Collection, buys the, iv. 334, n. 6;<br/>

  <i>Rambler</i>, orders a translation of the, iv. 277;<br/>

  sends Reynolds a snuff-box, iii. 370.<br/>

<i>Catholicon</i>, ii. 399.<br/>

CATILINE, i. 32.<br/>

CATO the Censor, iv. 79.<br/>

CATOR, John, iv. 313, 340, n. 3.<br/>

CATS, shooting, iv. 197.<br/>

CATULLUS, iv. 180.<br/>

CAULFIELD, Miss, iii. 100.<br/>

CAVE, Edward, account of him, i. 113, n. 1;<br/>

  Abridgment of Trapp's <i>Sermons</i>, publishes an, i. 140, n. 5;<br/>

  attacked by rivals, i. 113, n. 3;<br/>

  Birch, Dr., Letters to, i. 139, 150, 151, 153;<br/>

  Boyse's verses to him, iv. 441;<br/>

  coach, sets up a, i. 152, n. 1; ii. 226, n. 2;<br/>

  death and effects, i. 256, ns. 1 and 2;<br/>

  <i>Debates</i>, publishes the, i. 115-8, 136, 150-2, 501-12;<br/>

    reports them, i. 503;<br/>

  descendants, collateral, i. 90, n. 4;<br/>

  examined before House of Lords, i. 111, n. 3, 501;<br/>

  (<i>Sylvanus Urban</i>), <i>Gentleman's Magazine</i>, projects the, i. 90, 111;<br/>

    attends closely to its sale, iii. 322;<br/>

  ghost, saw a, ii. 178, 182;<br/>

  indecent books, sells, i. 112, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson 'Cave's Oracle,' i. 140, n. 5;<br/>

    first employer, i. 103;<br/>

    <i>Life of Savage</i>, buys the copyright of, i. 165, n. 1;<br/>

    letters from: see JOHNSON, Letters;<br/>

    money account with, i. 135;<br/>

    <i>Ode</i> to him, i. 113;<br/>

    <i>Rambler</i>, proprietor of, i. 203, n. 6, 208, n. 3, 209, n. 1;<br/>

    and the screen, i. 163, n. 1;<br/>

    writes his <i>Life</i>, i. 256;<br/>

  'penurious paymaster,' i. 121, n. 2; iv. 409;<br/>

  prizes for verses, offers, i. 91, n. 2, 136;<br/>

  treatment of his readers, i. 157, n. 4;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 122, n. 4, 135, 176, n. 2, 242.<br/>

CAVE, Edward, Jun., i. 111, n. 3.<br/>

CAVE, Miss, i. 90, n. 4.<br/>

CAVERSHAM, ii. 258, n. 3.<br/>

CAWSTON, ——, iv. 418.<br/>

CAXTON, William, iii. 254.<br/>

CECIL, Colonel, ii. 183.<br/>

<i>Cecilia</i>. See Miss BURNEY.<br/>

CEDED ISLANDS, money arising from the, ii. 353, n. 4.<br/>

CELIBACY, cheerless, ii. 128.<br/>

CELSUS, iii. 152, n. 2.<br/>

CELTS, descended from the Scythians, v. 224.<br/>

CENSURE, ecclesiastical, iii. 59.<br/>

<i>Cento</i>, ii. 96, n. 1.<br/>

CERTAINTIES, small, the bane of men of talents, ii. 323.<br/>

CERVANTES, Don Quixote's death, ii. 370:<br/>

  see DON QUIXOTE;<br/>

  praised <i>Il Palmerino d' Inghilterra</i>, iii. 2<br/>

'CHAIR OF VERITY,' iii. 58, n. 3.<br/>

CHALMERS, Alexander, edits the <i>Spectator</i>, ii. 212, n. 1;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 136, n. 3; iii. 230, n. 5.<br/>

CHALMERS, George, edits Johnson's <i>Debates</i>, i. 152, n. 2.<br/>

'CHAM OF LITERATURE,' i. 348.<br/>

CHAMBERLAIN, Lord, Johnson's application to the, iii. 34, n. 4.<br/>

CHAMBERLAYNE, Edward, iv. 98.<br/>

CHAMBERLAYNE, Rev. Mr., iv. 288.<br/>

CHAMBERS, Catherine, i. 513-6; death, ii. 43.<br/>

CHAMBERS, Ephraim,<br/>

  <i>Dictionary of Arts and Sciences</i>, i. 138, 219;<br/>

    new edition, ii. 203, n. 3;<br/>

  epitaph, i. 219, n. 1, 498, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson takes his style as a model, i. 218.<br/>

CHAMBERS, Sir Robert, dissenters and snails, ii. 268, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's companion to Newcastle, ii. 264; v. 16, 20;<br/>

    learnt law from him, iii. 22;<br/>

    letter to him, i. 274;<br/>

    prescribes remedies to, ii. 260;<br/>

    recommends him to Warren Hastings, iv. 68-9;<br/>

    visits him, ii. 25, 46;<br/>

  judge in India, appointed, ii. 264;<br/>

    threatened with revocation, ib., n. i;<br/>

  Langton's will, makes, ii. 261;<br/>

  Lincoln College, Oxford, member of, i. 274;<br/>

  Literary Club, member of the, i. 478, n. 2, 479;<br/>

  married, ii. 274; Principal of New Inn Hall, ii. 46, 268, n. 2;<br/>

  portrait in University College, ii. 25, n. 2;<br/>

    at Streatham, iv. 158, n. 1;<br/>

  professor in the imaginary college, v. 109;<br/>

  proud or negligent, ii. 272;<br/>

  Warton, Dr., recommends him to W. G. Hamilton, i. 519;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 274, 336, 357, 370; ii. 265; iv. 344; v. 66.<br/>

CHAMBERS, Dr. Robert,<br/>

  <i>Traditions of Edinburgh</i>—Boyd's Inn, v. 21, n. 2;<br/>

  Edinburgh, a new face in the streets, v. 39, n. 3;<br/>

  noble families in the old town, v. 43, n. 4;<br/>

  Hailes, Lord, i. 432, <i>n</i>. 3;<br/>

  <i>Hardyknute</i>, ii. 91, n. 2;<br/>

  James's Court, v. 22, n. 2;<br/>

  Kames, Lord, ii. 200, n. 1;<br/>

  Macdonald's, Flora, virulence, v. 185, n. 4;<br/>

  Monboddo, Lord, ii. 74, n. 1.<br/>

CHAMBERS, Sir William,<br/>

  <i>Dissertation on Oriental Gardening</i>, iv. 60, n. 7; v. 186;<br/>

    ridiculed in _The Heroic Epistle, ib.;<br/>

  Johnson writes an introduction to his <i>Chinese Architecture</i>, iv. 188;<br/>

  Somerset House, architect of, iv. 187, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Treatise on Civil Architecture</i>, iv. 187, n. 4.<br/>

CHAMIER, Andrew, account of him, i. 478;<br/>

  Goldsmith, his estimate of, iii. 252-3;<br/>

  Johnson consults him in Dodd's case, iii. 121;<br/>

    gets his interest for Mr. Welch, iii. 217;<br/>

    visits him, iii. 398, n. 1;<br/>

  professor in the imaginary college, v. 109;<br/>

  signs the Round-Robin, iii. 83.<br/>

CHAMPION, Sir G., iii. 459.<br/>

<i>Champion, The</i>, i. 169.<br/>

CHANCELLORS, Lord High, how chosen, ii. 157.<br/>

CHANCES, iv. 330.<br/>

<i>Chances, The</i>, ii. 233, n. 4.<br/>

CHANDLER, Dr., ii. 445, n. 1.<br/>

CHANGE, silver, iv. 191.<br/>

CHANTILLY, ii. 400.<br/>

CHAPEL-HOUSE, ii. 451.<br/>

CHAPLAINS, ii. 96.<br/>

CHAPONE, Mrs., account of her, iv. 246, n. 6;<br/>

  <i>Correspondence</i>, her, i. 203, n. 4;<br/>

  Johnson, letter from, iv. 247;<br/>

    his meeting with the Abbé Raynal, iv. 434;<br/>

    his views on natural depravity, v. 211, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Rambler</i>, contributes to the, i. 203;<br/>

  Williams, Mrs., account of, i. 232, n. 1.<br/>

CHARACTER, a most complete one, ii. 402;<br/>

  argument, its weight in an, ii. 443; v. 29, n. 5;<br/>

  delineation in the <i>Anabasis</i>, iv. 31;<br/>

  expectation of uniformity, iii. 282, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson saw a great variety, iii. 20;<br/>

    his sketches of them, ib.;<br/>

  men not bound to reveal their children's character, iii. 18;<br/>

  not to be tried by one particular, iii. 238;<br/>

  must not be lessened, v. 247;<br/>

  nature and manners, ii. 48;<br/>

    as to this world not hurt by vice, iii. 342, 349.<br/>

CHARADE, a, iv. 195.<br/>

CHARITABLE ESTABLISHMENT IN WALES, a, iii. 255.<br/>

CHARITY. See ALMSGIVING.<br/>

CHARLEMONT, first Earl of,<br/>

  Beauclerk's character, draws, i. 249, n. 1;<br/>

    letters to him, ii. 192;<br/>

  Hume's French, i. 439, n. 2;<br/>

  Hume and Mrs. Mallet, ii. 8, n. 4;<br/>

  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;<br/>

  Johnson and Vestris, iv. 79;<br/>

  professor in the imaginary college, v. 108;<br/>

  story of the Pyramids, iii. 352, 449, 458;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 235, 274, n. 3; iv. 78.<br/>

CHARLES I,<br/>

  anniversary of his death, ii. 152, n. 1;<br/>

    kept by Boswell with old port and solemn talk, iii. 371;<br/>

  birth-place, v. 399;<br/>

  concessions to parliament, v. 340;<br/>

  corn, price of, in his reign, iii. 232, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson and Lord Auchinleck dispute about him, v. 382, n. 2;<br/>

  'murder,' his, unpopular, ii. 370;<br/>

  political principles in his time, ii. 369;<br/>

  saying about lawyers, ii. 214;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 194, n. 2, 466; ii. 170, n. 2; v. 204, 346, 406.<br/>

CHARLES II, atheist and bigot, iv. 194, n. 1;<br/>

  betrayed and sold the nation, ii. 342, n. 2;<br/>

  corn, price of, in his reign, iii. 232, n. 1;<br/>

  descendants, his, Beauclerk, i. 248, n. 2;<br/>

    Commissioner Cardonnel, iii. 390, n. 1;<br/>

    Charles Fox, iv. 292, n. 2;<br/>

  Duke of York and Catharine Sedley, v. 49;<br/>

  France, took money from, ii. 342;<br/>

  Heale, at, iv. 234, n. 1;<br/>

  Hume's partiality for him, ii. 341, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's partiality for him, i. 248; ii. 341; iv. 292, n. 2;<br/>

  'lenity,' his, iv. 41;<br/>

  Lewis XIV, might have been as absolute as, ii. 370;<br/>

  manners, ii. 41;<br/>

  political principles in his time, ii. 369;<br/>

  social, i. 442;<br/>

  story-telling, excelled in, iii. 390, n. 1;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 437, n 2; v. 357, n. 3.<br/>

CHARLES III (the Young Pretender), ii. 253.<br/>

CHARLES EDWARD, Prince. See PRETENDER.<br/>

CHARLES V, Emperor, plays at his own funeral, iii. 247.<br/>

CHARLES X, of France, ii. 401, n. 4.<br/>

CHARLES XII, of Sweden, compared with Socrates, iii. 265;<br/>

  dressed plainly, ii. 475;<br/>

  Johnson's <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>, i. 195.<br/>

<i>Charles of Sweden</i>, i. 153.<br/>

CHARLOTTE, Queen, account of Boswell, i. 5, n. 1;<br/>

  Garrick's compliment  to her, ii. 233;<br/>

  'a lady of experience,' ii. 142;<br/>

  Queen's House, ii. 33, n. 3;<br/>

  Sunday knotting, iii. 242, n. 3;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 383; ii. 290.<br/>

<i>Charmer, The</i>, v. 313.<br/>

CHARTER-HOUSE, iii. 124, 441.<br/>

CHARTER-HOUSE SCHOOL, iii. 222.<br/>

CHARTRES, Colonel, ii. 211, n. 4.<br/>

CHASTITY, one deviation from it ruins a woman, ii. 56;<br/>

  property depends on it, ii. 457; v. 209.<br/>

CHATHAM, William Pitt, Earl of,<br/>

  Boswell, correspondence with, ii. 13, n. 3, 59, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Capability</i> Brown, account of, iii. 400, n. 2;<br/>

  Cardross, Lord, offers a post to, ii. 177;<br/>

  Cumming the Quaker's account of him, v. 98, n. 1;<br/>

  Dictator, iii. 356;<br/>

  excisemen, attacks, i. 294, n. 9;<br/>

  Garrick, notes to, ii. 227;<br/>

  Highland regiments, raises, iii. 198; v. 150;<br/>

  House of Commons, last speech in the, ii. 16, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson attacks him, ii. 134, n. 4, 314;<br/>

    criticises his oratory, iv. 317;<br/>

    writes a speech in his name, i. 504;<br/>

  Loudoun, Lord, recalls, v. 372, n. 3;<br/>

  merchants and tradesmen, praises honest, v. 327, n. 4;<br/>

  'meteor,' i. 131; v. 339;<br/>

  oratory, his, i. 152;<br/>

  Oxford in 1754, at, i. 171, n. 1;<br/>

  'Ptit,' figures in the <i>Debates</i> as, i. 502;<br/>

  public and private schools, on, iii. 12, n. 1;<br/>

  Scotch Militia bill, acquiesces in the, ii. 431, n. 1;<br/>

  Shelburne joins his ministry, iii. 36, n. 1;<br/>

  son, his, superior to him, iv. 219,<i> n.</i> 3;<br/>

  Trecothick, praises, iii. 76,<i> n.</i> 2;<br/>

  Walpole, distinguished from, ii. 196;<br/>

  war, his glorious, ii. 126;<br/>

  Whigs and Tories, distinguishes, i. 431, n. 1;<br/>

  'woollen, buried in,' ii. 453, n. 2;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 201, n. 3.<br/>

CHATSWORTH, Boswell visits it, iii. 208;<br/>

  Johnson visits it in 1774, v. 429;<br/>

    in 1784, iv. 357, 367;<br/>

  present at a 'public dinner,' ib., n. 3.<br/>

CHATTERTON, Thomas,<br/>

  money gained by Beckford's death, iii. 201, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Rowley's Poetry,</i> iii. 50;<br/>

    pretended discovery, ib., n. 1;<br/>

      Johnson's admiration, iii. 51;<br/>

        Goldsmith's belief, ib., n. 2;<br/>

        Walpole's disbelief, ib.;<br/>

    quarrel about it between Goldsmith and Percy, iii. 276, n. 2;<br/>

  'wild adherence to him,' iv. 141.<br/>

CHAUCER, took much from the Italians, iii. 254.<br/>

<i>Chaucer, Life of,</i> i. 306.<br/>

CHEAP, Captain, i. 117, n. 2.<br/>

CHELSEA, ii. 169, n. 1.<br/>

CHELSEA COLLEGE, ii. 64.<br/>

CHEMISTRY,<br/>

  Johnson's love of it, i. 140, 436; ii. 155;<br/>

    'the new kinds of air,' iv. 237;<br/>

  Priestley's discoveries, 238.<br/>

CHENEY WALK, ii. 99, n. 5.<br/>

CHEROKEES, v. 248.<br/>

CHESELDEN, William, iii. 152,<i> n.</i> 3.<br/>

CHESTER, Boswell visits it, iii. 411-15;<br/>

  Johnson and the Thrales, v. 435;<br/>

  Michael Johnson attends the fair, ib.;<br/>

  passage thence to Ireland, i. 105.<br/>

CHESTERFIELD, fourth Earl of,<br/>

  active sports and idleness, i. 48, n. 1;<br/>

  Addison and Leandro Alberti, ii. 346, n. 7;<br/>

  appeal to people in high life, how to be made, i. 257, n. 1;<br/>

  Bolingbroke's ready knowledge, ii. 256, n. 3;<br/>

  'But stoops to conquer,' quotes, ii. 205, n. 4;<br/>

  conversation and knowledge, iv. 332;<br/>

  dedications, the <i>plastron</i> of, i. 183, n. 3;<br/>

  dignified but insolent, iv. 174;<br/>

  dissembling anger, i. 265, n. 1;<br/>

  duplicity, his, i. 264-5;<br/>

  Eliot, Mr., praises, iv. 334, n. 5;<br/>

  epigram written with his diamond, iv. 102, n. 4;<br/>

  exquisitely elegant, iv. 332;<br/>

  Faulkner, George, account of, v. 44, n. 2;<br/>

  friend, had no, iii. 387;<br/>

  flogging, on, i. 46, n. 2;<br/>

  general reflections, on, iv. 313, n. 2;<br/>

  graces and wickedness, on uniting the, ii. 340;<br/>

  <i>great</i>, pronunciation of, ii. 161;<br/>

  <i>Letters</i>, 'Hottentot, a respectable,' i. 266; v. 103, n. 2;<br/>

  Ireland's sufferings from a drunken gentry, v. 250, n. 1:<br/>

  Johnson addresses to him the Plan, i. 183-5; ii. 1, n. 2; 35, n. 5;<br/>

    his MS. notes on it, i. 185, n. 2;<br/>

    <i>Dictionary</i>, writes in <i>The World</i> on, i. 257-60;<br/>

    flatters with a view to a _Dedication, i. 257;<br/>

    letter to him, i. 260-5, 284, n. 3; iv. 192, n. 2; v. 130, n. 3;<br/>

      Boswell begs for a copy of it, iii. 418, 420;<br/>

        gets it, iv. 128;<br/>

    neglects, i. 256-265;<br/>

    presents ten pounds to, i. 261, n. 3;<br/>

    speeches ascribed to him, iii. 351;<br/>

  laughter low and unbecoming, declares, ii. 378, n. 2;<br/>

  letter to his son at Rome, iv. 78, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Letters</i>, Johnson's description of them, i. 266;<br/>

    Boswell's, ib., n. 2;<br/>

    Lord Eliot's, iv. 333;<br/>

    literary property in them contested, i. 266;<br/>

    pretty book, might be made a, iii. 53;<br/>

    sale, ii. 329;<br/>

    mentioned, iii. 54;<br/>

  <i>Miscellaneous Works</i>, published in 1777, iii. 108, n. 2;<br/>

  old and ill, i. 262, n. 1;<br/>

  Parisians not learned, declares the, i. 454, n. 3;<br/>

  patron of bad authors, iv, 331, n. 1;<br/>

  position, great, ii. 329; pride, i. 265;<br/>

  <i>respectable</i>, use of the term, iii. 241, n. 2;<br/>

  Richardson's novels, ii. 174, n. 2;<br/>

  Robinson, Sir T., epigram on, i. 434, n. 3;<br/>

  Secretary of State, iv. 333, n. 2;<br/>

  speeches composed by Johnson, i. 505;<br/>

  study of eloquence, on the, iv. 184, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>transpire</i>, iii. 343, n. 2;<br/>

  Tyrawley, Lord, criticism on, ii. 211;<br/>

  'wit among Lords,' i. 266;<br/>

  wit, his, ii. 211;<br/>

  world, on the judgment of the, i. 200, n. 2;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 151; iv. 78.<br/>

CHESTERFIELD, fifth Earl of, Dodd, Dr., forges his name, iii. 140.<br/>

CHEVALIER, the, v. 140, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Chevalier's Muster Roll</i>, v. 142, n. 2.<br/>

CHEYNE, Dr. George,<br/>

  account of his diet, iii. 27, n. 1;<br/>

    on bleeding, iii. 152, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>English Malady</i>, i. 65; iii. 27, 87; v. 210;<br/>

  rule of conduct, v. 154.<br/>

<i>Cheynel, Life of</i>, i. 228; ii. 187, n. 2. v. 48.<br/>

CHICHESTER, iv. 160.<br/>

CHIEFS. See HIGHLANDS.<br/>

CHIESLEY OF DALRY, v. 227, n. 4.<br/>

CHILDHOOD, companions of one's, iii. 131.<br/>

CHILD, ——, of Southwark, i. 491, n. 1.<br/>

CHILDREN, business men care little for them, iii. 29;<br/>

  company, should not be brought into, iii. 28, 128;<br/>

  Gay's writings for them, ii. 408, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson on books for them, iv. 8, n. 3, 16;<br/>

  library, to be turned loose in a, iv. 21;<br/>

  management of them, i. 46, n. 3;<br/>

  method of rearing them, ii. 101;<br/>

  natural aptitudes, v. 211, 214;<br/>

  prematurely wise, ii. 408.<br/>

CHINA, dog-butchers, ii. 232;<br/>

  mortality on the voyage thither, i. 348, n. 3;<br/>

  wall of, iii. 269, 457;<br/>

  people 'perfectly polite,' i. 89;<br/>

    barbarians, iii. 339;<br/>

  plantations, iv. 60.<br/>

<i>China</i>, Du Halde's <i>Description of</i>. See Du HALDE.<br/>

CHINA-FANCY, iii. 163, n. 1.<br/>

CHINA-MANUFACTORY, iii. 163.<br/>

<i>Chinese Architecture</i>. See CHAMBERS, Sir W.<br/>

<i>Chinese Stories</i>, i. 136.<br/>

CHISWICK, iv. 168, n. 1.<br/>

'CHOICE OF DIFFICULTIES,' v. 146.<br/>

CHOISI, Abbé, iii. 336.<br/>

CHOLMONDELEY, G. J., iv. 345.<br/>

CHOLMONDELEY, Mrs., account of her, iii. 318, n. 3;<br/>

  a very airy lady, v. 248;<br/>

  an affected gentleman, iii. 261;<br/>

  Johnson takes her hand, iii. 318, n. 3;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 125; iii. 256.<br/>

CHRIST'S HOSPITAL, ii. 286.<br/>

CHRIST'S satisfaction, iv. 124; v. 88.<br/>

CHRISTIAN, Rev. Mr., ii. 52.<br/>

<i>Christian Hero</i>, ii. 448.<br/>

<i>Christian Philosopher and Politician</i>, i. 202, n. 1.<br/>

CHRISTIANITY,<br/>

  differences political rather than religious, i. 405;<br/>

    chiefly in forms, ii. 150; iii. 188;<br/>

  evidences for it, i. 398, 405, 428, 444,454; ii. 8, 14;<br/>

iii. 188, 316; v. 47, 340;<br/>

  revelation of immortality its great article, iii. 188;<br/>

  its 'wilds,' iii. 313.<br/>

CHRISTIE, James, the auctioneer, iv. 402, n. 2.<br/>

CHRYSOSTOM, v. 446.<br/>

CHURCH, The, possesses the right of censure, iii. 59-62, 91, n. 3.<br/>

'CHURCH AND KING,' iv. 29, 296.<br/>

CHURCH OF ENGLAND, in Charles II's reign, ii. 341;<br/>

  'Churchmen will not be Catholics,' iv. 29, n. 1;<br/>

  Convocation denied it, i. 464;<br/>

  discipline and Convocation, iv. 177;<br/>

  example of attendance at the services, ii. 173;<br/>

  House of Hanover, all against the, v. 271;<br/>

  manner of reading the service, iii. 436;<br/>

  neglected state of the buildings, v. 41, n. 3;<br/>

    of the cathedrals, 114, n. 1;<br/>

  observance of days, ii. 458;<br/>

  parishes neglected, iii. 437;<br/>

  patronage, ii. 242-6;<br/>

  revenues, iii. 138;<br/>

  theory and practice, iii. 138.<br/>

CHURCH OF ROME. See ROMAN CATHOLICS.<br/>

CHURCH OF SCOTLAND. See under SCOTLAND.<br/>

CHURCHILL, Charles,<br/>

  account of the publication of his poems, i. 419, n. 3;<br/>

    profits, ib. n. 5;<br/>

  'blotting,' hatred of, i. 419, n. 5;<br/>

  Boswell criticises his poetry, i. 419;<br/>

  'brains not excised,' v. 51;<br/>

  Cowper's high estimate of his poetry, i. 419, n. 4;<br/>

  Davies and his wife, i. 391, n. 2, 484; iii. 223, 249;<br/>

  death, his, i. 395, n. 2, 419, n. 3;<br/>

  Dodsley's <i>Cleane</i>, i. 326, n. 3;<br/>

  Flexney, his publisher, ii. 113, n. 2;<br/>

  Francklin, Dr., iv. 34, n. 1;<br/>

  'gainst fools be guarded,' v. 217, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Gotham</i>, i. 420, n. 1;<br/>

  Guthrie, William, i. 118, n. 1;<br/>

  Hill, Sir John, ii. 38, n. 2;<br/>

  Holland the actor, iv. 7, n. 5;<br/>

  Johnson, attacks, about <i>Shakespeare</i>, i. 319-20, 419;<br/>

    about the Cock-Lane Ghost, i. 406;<br/>

    about his strong terms, iii. 1, n. 2;<br/>

    despises his poetry, i. 418;<br/>

  Lloyd in the Fleet-prison, i. 395, n. 2;<br/>

  Norton, Sir Fletcher, ii. 472, n. 2;<br/>

  Ogilvie's poetry, i. 423, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Prophecy of Famine</i>, i. 373, n. 1, 420; iii. 77, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Gotham</i>, Europe's treatment of savages, iii. 204, n. 1;<br/>

  straw in Bedlam, ii. 374, n. 2;<br/>

  'strolling tribe,' i. 168, n. 1;<br/>

  Warburton, Bishop, iv. 49, n. 1; v. 81, n. 2;<br/>

  Whitehead, Paul, i. 125;<br/>

  'With wits a fool, with fools a wit,' i. 266, n. 1.<br/>

CHURTON, Rev. Ralph, ii. 258, n. 3; iv. 212, n. 4, 300, n. 2.<br/>

CIBBER, Colley,<br/>

  <i>Apology</i>, ii. 92; iii. 72;<br/>

    Goldsmith praises it, ib., n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Birth-day Odes</i>, i. 149, n. 3, 401-2; ii. 92; iii. 72, 184;<br/>

  <i>Careless Husband</i>, revised by Mrs. Brett, i. 174, n. 2;<br/>

    origin of the story, ib.;<br/>

    no doubt written by Cibber, ii. 340;<br/>

    praised by Pope and H. Walpole, iii. 72, n. 4;<br/>

  Comedies, merit in his, ii. 340; iii. 72;<br/>

  Chesterfield, and Johnson, anecdote about, i. 256;<br/>

  conversation, his, ii. 92, 340; iii. 72;<br/>

  Dryden, recollections of, iii. 71;<br/>

  Fenton, insulted, i. 102, n. 2;<br/>

  genteel ladies, his, ii. 340;<br/>

  <i>Hob or The Country Wake</i>, ii. 465, n. 1;<br/>

  ignorance, iii. 72, n. 1; iv. 243;<br/>

  impudence, i. 154, n. 2; ii. 340, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson's epigram on him, i. 149; v. 348, 350, 404;<br/>

    shows one of his <i>Odes</i> to, ii. 92;<br/>

    mode of arguing: see JOHNSON, arguing;<br/>

  manager of Drury Lane, v. 244, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Musa Cibberi</i>, iv. 3, n. 1;<br/>

  _Non-juror, The, _ii. 321;<br/>

  poet-laureate, i. 401, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Provoked Husband</i>, ii. 48; iv. 284, n. 2;<br/>

  Richard III, version of, iii. 73, n. 3;<br/>

  Richardson's  respect for him, ii. 93; iii. 184;<br/>

  vanity, iii. 264;<br/>

  Walpole praises his character, i. 401, n. 1;<br/>

    his <i>Apology</i>, iii. 72, n. 4;<br/>

    and his acting, iv. 243, n. 6;<br/>

  Whig, violent, iii. 30, n. 1.<br/>

CIBBER, Theophilus,<br/>

  edits the <i>Lives of the Poets,</i> i. 187; iii. 29-31, 117;<br/>

  death, iii. 30, n. 1.<br/>

CIBBER, Mrs. (wife of Theophilus), account of her, v. 126, n. 5;<br/>

  acted in Irene, i. 197;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 92.<br/>

CICERO, Burke not like him, v. 213-4;<br/>

  Chesterfield likened to him, iii. 351;<br/>

  image of Virtue, ii. 15, n. 2, 443;<br/>

  quotations from <i>Cato Major</i>, iii. 438, n. 2; iv. 374, n. 2;<br/>

    <i>Ep. ad Att.</i>, iv. 379, n. 2;<br/>

    <i>Ep. ad Fam</i>., iv. 424, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Tuscul. Quaest</i>., ii. 107, n. 1.<br/>

CIRCULATING LIBRARIES, i. 102, n. 2; ii. 36, n. 1.<br/>

CITY, a, its solitude, iii. 379, n. 2.<br/>

CITY OF LICHFIELD, a county, i. 36, n. 4.<br/>

CITY OF LONDON. See LONDON.<br/>

CITY-POET, iii. 75.<br/>

CIVIL LAW, i. 134.<br/>

CIVILISED LIFE. See SAVAGES, and SOCIETY.<br/>

<i>Civility</i>, ii. 155; iii. 77.<br/>

<i>Civilisation</i>, ii. 155.<br/>

CLANRANALD, ii. 309; Allan of Clanranald, v. 290.<br/>

CLAPP, Mrs., ii. 63, 115-6.<br/>

CLARE, Lord, friendship with Goldsmith, ii. 136; iii. 311.<br/>

CLARENDON, first Earl of,<br/>

  <i>History of the Rebellion</i>, its authenticity, i. 294, n. 9;<br/>

    characters trustworthy, ii. 79;<br/>

    character of Falkland, iv. 428, n. 2;<br/>

    compared with Hume and Robertson, v. 57, n. 3;<br/>

    recommended by Johnson, iv. 311;<br/>

    style and matter, iii. 257-8;<br/>

    Villiers's ghost, iii. 351;<br/>

  University of Oxford and his heirs, ii. 424.<br/>

CLARENDON PRESS, Johnson's letter on its management, ii. 424, 441.<br/>

CLARET, for boys, in. 381; iv. 79;<br/>

  gives the dropsy before drunkenness, v. 248-9.<br/>

<i>Clarissa. See</i> RICHARDSON, S.<br/>

CLARK, Alderman Richard, member of the Essex Head Club, iv. 258, 438;<br/>

  Johnson, letter from, iv. 258.<br/>

CLARKE, Rev. Dr. Samuel, Christian evidences, i. 398;<br/>

  free-will, ii. 104;<br/>

  <i>Homer</i>, edition of, ii. 129;<br/>

  Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>, not quoted in, i. 189, n. 1; iv. 416, n. 2;<br/>

  Leibnitz, controversy with, v. 287;<br/>

  learning, iv. 21;<br/>

    studied hard, i. 71;<br/>

  literary  character, i. 3, _n. _2;<br/>

  orthodox, not, iii. 248; v. 288;<br/>

  Queen Caroline wished to make him a bishop, iii. 248, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Sermons</i>, ii. 263, 476; iii. 248;<br/>

    recommended by Johnson on his death-bed, iv. 416;<br/>

  unbending  himself, fond of, i. 3.<br/>

CLARKE, Sir T., i. 45, n. 4.<br/>

CLAUDIAN, ii. 315.<br/>

CLAVIUS, ii. 444.<br/>

CLAXTON, Mr., ii. 247.<br/>

CLEMENT, William, Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, i. 489.<br/>

CLENARDUS, iv. 20.<br/>

_Cleone. See _DODSLEY.<br/>

<i>Cleonice</i>, ii. 289,<i> n.</i> 3.<br/>

CLERGYMAN, a,<br/>

  at Bath, iv. 149;<br/>

    Johnson's letter to him, iv. 150;<br/>

  extraordinary character, an, iv. 296, n. 3;<br/>

  hopeless ignorance of one, iv. 33, n. 3;<br/>

  one rebuked by Johnson, iv. 19;<br/>

  a young clergyman, Johnson's letter to, iii. 436.<br/>

CLERGYMEN, can be but half a beau, iv. 76;<br/>

  <i>Court</i>-party, of the, v. 255, n. 5;<br/>

  decorum required in them, iv. 76;<br/>

  duties, i. 320;<br/>

  elocution, taught, iv. 206;<br/>

  English compared with Scotch, v. 251-3, 381;<br/>

  Harrogate, at, v. 252, <i>n. 3</i>;<br/>

  holy artifices, iii. 438;<br/>

  learning, iv. 13;<br/>

  library fit for one, v. 121;<br/>

  life, their, i. 320, 476; iii. 304;<br/>

  men of the world, aping, iv. 76;<br/>

  popular election, ii. 149;<br/>

  preaching: _see <i>PREACHING;<br/>

  sinners in general, ii. 172.<br/>

CLERK, Sir Philip Jennings, account of him, iv. 80;<br/>

  argument with Johnson, iv. 81.<br/>

CLERMONT, Lady, iii. 425.<br/>

CLIENTS. See LAW.<br/>

CLIMATE, happiness not affected by it, ii. 195.<br/>

CLINABS, i. 502, 512.<br/>

CLINTON, Sir Henry, iv. 140, n. 2.<br/>

CLITHEROE, iv. 162.<br/>

CLIVE, Lord,<br/>

  astonished at his own moderation, iii. 401, n. 1;<br/>

  character by Dr. Robertson, iii. 334, 350;<br/>

  his chest full of gold, iii. 401;<br/>

  destroyed himself, iii. 334, 350.<br/>

CLIVE, Mrs.,<br/>

  Johnson describes her acting, iv. 243; v. 126;<br/>

    and Walpole, H., iv. 243, n. 6;<br/>

  robbed by highwaymen, iii. 239, n. 1;<br/>

  'understands what you say,' iv. 7.<br/>

CLOTHES.</i> See_ DRESS.<br/>

CLOUGH, Arthur, v. 149, n. 1.<br/>

CLOUGH, Sir Richard, v. 436.<br/>

CLOW, Professor, v. 369, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Clubable</i>, iv. 254, n. 2.<br/>

CLUBS: Almack's, iii. 23, n. 1;<br/>

  Arthur's,  v. 84, n. 1;<br/>

  Boar's Head, v. 247;<br/>

  British Coffee-house, ii. 195; iv. 179, n. 1;<br/>

  Brookes's, ii. 292,<i> n.</i> 4; iv. 279, n. 2, 358, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>City Club</i> at the Queen's Arms, iv. 87;<br/>

  Cocoa-tree Club, v. 386, n. 1;<br/>

  Essex Head, account of its foundation and members, iv. 253-5,436-8;<br/>

    Boswell and Johnson at a meeting, iv. 275;<br/>

    Johnson attacked with illness there, iv. 259;<br/>

    mentioned,  iv. 354, 359, 360;<br/>

  Eumelian, iv. 394;<br/>

  Gaming Club, iii. 23;<br/>

  Ivy Lane, account of it, i. 190, 191, n. 5, 478, n. 2;<br/>

    Lennox, Mrs., supper in honour of, i. 103, n. 3, 255, n. 1;<br/>

    old members meet in 1783, iv. 253, 435-6;<br/>

  Johnson's definition of a club, iv. 254, n. 5;<br/>

  Literary Club, account of it, i. 477-81; v. 109;<br/>

    attendance expected, ii. 273;<br/>

    attendances in 1766, ii. 17, 201;<br/>

    Althorpe, Lord, iii. 424;<br/>

    Banks, Sir Joseph, iii. 365;<br/>

    Beauclerk, described by, ii. 192, n. 2;<br/>

      loss by his death, iii. 424;<br/>

    black-ball, exclusion by a single, iii. 116;<br/>

    books, some of the members talk from, v. 378,_ n._4;<br/>

    Boswell's election: See BOSWELL, Literary Club;<br/>

    Boswell's account of meetings at which he was present,<br/>

      his introduction, ii. 240;<br/>

      Johnson's apology to Goldsmith, ii. 255;<br/>

      talk of second-sight and Swift, ii. 318;<br/>

      Mrs. Abington's benefit, ii. 330;<br/>

      <i>Travels, Ossian</i>, the Black Bear, and patriotism, ii. 345;<br/>

      speakers distinguished by initials, iii. 230;<br/>

      Johnson's last dinner, iv. 326;<br/>

    Boswell's reports of meetings generally brief, ii. 242, n. 1,<br/>

345, n. 5;<br/>

    Burke's company lost to it, ii. 16;<br/>

    Bunbury elected, ii. 274;<br/>

    Camden Lord, black-balled, iii. 311, n. 2;<br/>

    day and hour of meeting, i. 478, 479; ii. 20, n. 1, 330, n. 1;<br/>

iii. 128, 365, 368;<br/>

    described in 1774 by Beauclerk, ii. 274, n. 3;<br/>

    Dodd sought admittance, iii. 280;<br/>

    Dunning, John, elected, iii. 128;<br/>

    first meeting of the winter, iii. 210;<br/>

    Fordyce elected, ii. 274;<br/>

    foundation, and list of members, i. 477-9, 481, n 3;<br/>

    Fox elected, ii. 274;<br/>

      talked little, iii. 267;<br/>

    Garrick elected, i. 480;<br/>

      his vanity, iii. 311, n. 3;<br/>

    Gibbon elected, i. 481, n. 3;<br/>

      describes it, ii. 348, n. 1;<br/>

      poisons it to Boswell, ii. 443, n. 1;<br/>

    Goldsmith recites some absurd verses, ii. 240; iv. 13;<br/>

      he wishes for more members, iv. 183;<br/>

      his epitaph to be shown to the Club, iii. 81;<br/>

    hanged or kicked, members  deserving to be, iii. 281;<br/>

    hogshead of claret nearly out, iii. 238;<br/>

    imaginary college at St. Andrews, v. 108-9;<br/>

    increase of members proposed, iii. 106;<br/>

    Johnson's attendance in his latter years, iii. 106, n. 4;<br/>

      attends after his attack of palsy, iv. 232-3;<br/>

      his last dinner, iv. 326,<br/>

        (for attendances with Boswell, See just above, under BOSWELL);<br/>

      dislikes several members, iii. 106;<br/>

      his friends of the Club, iv. 85;<br/>

      his funeral, iv. 419;<br/>

        subscriptions for his monument, iv. 423, ns. 1 and 3;<br/>

      incompliance with a <i>Call</i>, iv. 84;<br/>

      mentions the Club in a letter, ii. 136;<br/>

      reads his epitaph on Lady Elibank, iv. 10;<br/>

      talks of Mrs. Lennox's play, iv. 10;<br/>

    Jones, Sir W., described by, v. 109, n. 5;<br/>

    motto, its, i. 478, n. 3;<br/>

    name, i. 477; v. 109, n. 5;<br/>

    number of members, i. 478, n. 2, 479; iii. 106;<br/>

    Palmerston, second Lord, black-balled, iv. 232;<br/>

      elected, <i>ib. n.</i> 2;<br/>

    Porteus, Bishop of Chester, black-balled, iii. 311, n. 2;<br/>

    select merit, loses its, ii. 430, n. l;<br/>

    Sheridan, R.B., elected, iii. 316;<br/>

    Shipley, Bishop of St. Asaph, elected, iv. 75, n. 3;<br/>

    Smith, Adam, elected, ii. 430, n. 1;<br/>

    Steevens elected, ii. 273-4;<br/>

    Vesey elected, iv. 28;<br/>

    Vesey's (Mrs.) evening parties on Club nights, iii. 424, n. 3;<br/>

iv. 108, n. 4;<br/>

  Nonsense Club, i. 395, n. 2;<br/>

  Old Street Club, iii. 443-4; iv. 187;<br/>

  Poker Club, ii. 376, n. 1; 431, n. 1;<br/>

  Tall Club, i. 308, n. 6;<br/>

  White's, ii. 329, n. 3;<br/>

  World, The, iv. 102, n. 4.<br/>

COACH, post-coach, iii. 129; iv. 283;<br/>

  heavy coach, iv. 285.<br/>

COAL-HEAVERS, riots of, iii. 46, n. 5.<br/>

COALITION MINISTRY (Duke of Portland's) formed, iv. 174, n. 3;<br/>

  dismissed, i. 311, n. 1; iv. 165, n. 3, 249, n. 1;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 170, n. 1, 223, n. 1, 258, n. 2.<br/>

COBB, Mrs., ii. 388, 466; iii. 412; iv. 142, 143.<br/>

COBHAM, Lord, i. 491, n. 1; iii. 347; iv. 50, n. 4, 102, n. 4.<br/>

COBLENTZ, ii. 427, n. 4.<br/>

COCHRAN, General, i. 431, n. 1.<br/>

COCKBURN, Baron, iii. 335, n. 1.<br/>

COCKBURN, Dr., iii. 152, n. 3.<br/>

COCKBURN, Lord, civil juries in Scotland, ii. 201, n. 1;<br/>

  Dundas, Henry, Viscount Melville, ii. 160, n. 1;<br/>

  Edinburgh High School, ii. 144, n. 2;<br/>

  Edinburgh in the 18th century, v. 21, n. 1;<br/>

  Jeffrey's English accent, ii. 159, n. 6;<br/>

  Scotch county electors, iv. 248, n. 1;<br/>

  Scotch entails, ii. 414, n. 1;<br/>

  St. Giles, Edinburgh, v. 41, n. 1;<br/>

  titles of Scotch judges, v. 77, n. 4.<br/>

COCKENZIE, ii. 302, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Cocker's Arithmetic</i>, v. 138, n. 2.<br/>

COCK-LANE GHOST. See GHOSTS.<br/>

CODRINGTON, Colonel, iii. 204, n. 1.<br/>

COFFEE-HOUSE CRITICS, i. 288.<br/>

COFFEY, ——, v. 256, n. 1.<br/>

COFFLECT, iv. 77, n. 3.<br/>

COHAUSEN, Dr., ii. 427 n. 4.<br/>

COIN, exportation of, iv. 104-5.<br/>

COKE, Lord, a mere lawyer, ii. 158;<br/>

  his definition of law, iii. 16, n. 1;<br/>

  his painful course of study, iv. 310.<br/>

COKE, Lady Mary, i. 407, n. 1.<br/>

COL, the old Laird of, iii. 133; v. 29, n. 2.<br/>

COL, Alexander Maclean, of, the second son, ii. 308, 406, 411.<br/>

COL, Donald Maclean, the young Laird of,<br/>

  account of him, v. 250-1;<br/>

  the first road-maker, v. 235, n. 2;<br/>

  plans an excursion for Johnson, v. 254;<br/>

  accompanies him, v. 256-331;<br/>

  his bowl of punch, v. 258;<br/>

  manages the ship in the storm, v. 280-1;<br/>

  puts a rope in Boswell's hands, v. 282;<br/>

  <i>juvenis qui gaudet canibus</i>, v. 283;<br/>

  introduces turnips, v. 293;<br/>

  his family papers, v. 297-9;<br/>

  takes Johnson to his aunt's house, v. 312;<br/>

  anecdotes of Sir A. Macdonald, v. 315;<br/>

  his house in Mull, v. 316;<br/>

  deserves a statue, v. 327;<br/>

  his father's deputy, v. 329;<br/>

  'a noble animal', v. 330;<br/>

  death, ii. 287-8, 406; v. 331;<br/>

  mentioned, v. 95, 267, 341.<br/>

COLCHESTER, i. 466; iv. 15, n. 5.<br/>

COLDS, catching, ii. 51, 150; v. 278.<br/>

COLE, Henry, iv. 402, n. 2.<br/>

COLEBROOKE, Sir G., ii. 222, n. 3.<br/>

COLISEUM, ii. 106.<br/>

COLLECTIONS, the desire of  augmenting, iv. 105.<br/>

COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, ii. 297.<br/>

COLLEGE TUTOR, an old, advice to his pupils, ii. 237.<br/>

COLLEGES. See OXFORD.<br/>

COLLIER, Jeremy, censures actors, i. 167, n.. 2;<br/>

  'fought without a rival,' iv. 286, n. 3.<br/>

COLLINS, Anthony, iii. 363, n. 3.<br/>

COLLINS, William, affected the  obsolete, iii. 159, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's affection for him, i. 276, 383, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Life by Johnson</i>, i. 382;<br/>

  madness, his, i. 65, n. 3, 276, 277, 383;<br/>

  Poems, Glasgow edition, ii. 380.<br/>

COLLOQUIAL BARBARISMS, iii. 196.<br/>

'COLLYER, Joel', i. 315.<br/>

COLMAN, George, the elder,<br/>

  Boswell's belief in second sight, mocks, ii. 318;<br/>

  <i>Connoisseur</i>, starts the, i. 420,<i> n.</i> 3; ii. 334, n. 3;<br/>

  Foote's patent, buys, iii. 97;<br/>

  <i>Good Natured Man,</i> brings out the, iii. 320;<br/>

  <i>Jealous Wife, The</i>, i. 364, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson, imitation of, iv. 387-8;<br/>

  Literary Club, member of the, i. 478, n. 2, 479;<br/>

  <i>Odes to Obscurity</i>, ii. 334;<br/>

  professor in the imaginary college, v. 108;<br/>

  <i>Prose on Several Occasions</i>, iv. 387;<br/>

  Round-Robin, signed the, iii. 83;<br/>

  Shakespeare's Latin, iv. 18;<br/>

  <i>She Stoops to Conquer</i>, brings out, ii. 208, n.. 5;<br/>

  'Sir, if you don't lie you're a rascal,' iv. 10;<br/>

  <i>Student</i>, contributes to the, i. 209;<br/>

  <i>Terence</i>, translation of, iv. 18;<br/>

  Westminster School, at, i. 395, n. 2.<br/>

COLMAN, George, the son,<br/>

  Aberdeen, a student at, v. 85, n. 2;<br/>

    made a freeman of the city, v. 90, n. 2;<br/>

  Dunbar, Dr., describes, iii. 436, n. 1;<br/>

  Gibbon's dress, describes, ii. 443, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson and Gibbon, describes, iii. 54, n. 2.<br/>

COLOGNE, Elector of, iii. 447.<br/>

COLONIES, a loss to the community, i. 130, n. 2.<br/>

COLQUHOUN, Sir James, v. 363-5.<br/>

COLQUHOUN, Lady Helen, v. 365.<br/>

COLSON, Rev. Mr.,<br/>

  Garrick and Johnson recommended to him, i. 102;<br/>

  <i>Gelidus,</i> i. 101, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Columbiade, The</i>, iv. 331.<br/>

COLUMBUS, i. 455, n. 3; iv. 250.<br/>

COLVILL, Lady, v. 387, 394-5.<br/>

COMB-MAKER, a punctuating, iii. 32, n. 5.<br/>

<i>Combabus</i>, iii. 238, n. 2.<br/>

COMBERMERE, v. 433-5.<br/>

COMBERMERE, Lord, v. 433, n. 1.<br/>

COMEDY, distinguished from farce, ii. 95;<br/>

  its great end, ii. 233.<br/>

COMMANDMENT, ninth, emphasis in it, i. 169;<br/>

  in the sixth, i. 326, n. 1.<br/>

COMMENTARIES ON THE BIBLE, iii. 58.<br/>

COMMERCE, circulation of, iii. 177;<br/>

  effect of taxes on it, ii. 357;<br/>

  effect on relationship, ii. 177;<br/>

  not necessary to England, ii. 357.<br/>

COMMISSARIES, ii. 339, n. 2; iii. 184.<br/>

COMMON COUNCIL. See LONDON.<br/>

COMMON PEOPLE, inaccuracy in thoughts and words, iii. 136;<br/>

  their language proverbial, ib.<br/>

COMMON PRAYER BOOK, iv. 293.<br/>

COMMONS, DOCTORS', i. 462, n. 1.<br/>

COMMONS, House of. See DEBATES OF PARLIAMENT and HOUSE OF COMMONS.<br/>

COMMUNION OF SAINTS, iv. 290.<br/>

COMMUNITY OF GOODS, ii. 251.<br/>

COMMUTATION OF SINS AND VIRTUES, iv. 398.<br/>

COMPANION, the most welcome one, ii. 359, n. 2;<br/>

  a lasting one, iv. 235, n. 2.<br/>

COMPANY, good things must be provided, iii. 186; iv. 90;<br/>

  love of mean company, i. 449;<br/>

  of a new person, iv. 33. See JOHNSON, Company.<br/>

COMPIEGNE, ii. 400.<br/>

COMPLAINTS, iii. 368.<br/>

<i>Complete Angler</i>, i. 138, n. 5.<br/>

<i>Complete Vindication of the Licensers of the Stage</i>, i. 140.<br/>

COMPLIMENTS, offending the company by them, iv. 336;<br/>

  right to repeat them, iii. 240;<br/>

  without violating truth, iii. 161;<br/>

  unusual, v. 440, n. 2.<br/>

COMPOSITION, causes of hasty, i. 192, n. 5;<br/>

  errors caused by partial changes, iv. 11;<br/>

  fine passages to be struck out, ii. 237;<br/>

  happy moments for it, v. 40;<br/>

  Johnson's advice, iii. 437; v. 66-8;<br/>

  man writing from his own mind, ii. 344;<br/>

  pleasure, not a, iv. 219, n. 1;<br/>

  practised early, to be, iv. 12;<br/>

  setting oneself doggedly to it, v. 40, 110.<br/>

  See JOHNSON, Composition.<br/>

<i>Compositor</i>, iv. 321, n. 3.<br/>

COMPTON, Bishop of London, iii. 445, 447.<br/>

<i>Comus</i>, Johnson's Prologue to, i. 227.<br/>

CONCANEN, Matthew, v. 92, n. 4.<br/>

CONCEIT OF PARTS, iii. 316.<br/>

<i>Conceits</i>, i. 179.<br/>

<i>Concoction</i>, of a play, iii. 259.<br/>

CONDAMINE, La, <i>Account of the Savage Girl</i>, v. 110;<br/>

  of a Brazilian tribe, v. 242.<br/>

CONDÉ, Prince of, ii. 393, 400.<br/>

CONDESCENSION, iv. 3.<br/>

CONDUCT, gradations in it, iv. 75;<br/>

  wrong but with good meaning, iv. 360.<br/>

<i>Conduct of the Ministry</i> (1756), i. 309.<br/>

CONFESSION, ii. 105; iii. 60.<br/>

<i>Conf. Fab. Burdonum</i>, ii. 263.<br/>

CONFINEMENT, iii. 268.<br/>

CONFUCIUS, i. 157, n. 1; iii. 299.<br/>

<i>Congé d'élire</i>, iv. 323.<br/>

CONGLETON, v. 432.<br/>

<i>Conglobulate</i>, ii. 55.<br/>

CONGRESS. See AMERICA.<br/>

CONGREVE, Rev. Charles, chaplain to Archbishop Boulter, i. 45;<br/>

  pious but muddy, ii. 460, 474,<br/>

CONGREVE, William,<br/>

  <i>Beggar's Opera</i>, opinion of the, ii. 369. n. 1;<br/>

  Collier, Jeremy, attacked by, iv, 286, n. 3;<br/>

  Islam, at, iii. 187;<br/>

  Johnson's criticism on his plays, iv. 36, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Life</i>, iv. 56;<br/>

  <i>Mourning Bride</i>, its foolish conclusion, i. 389, n. 2;<br/>

    compared with Shakespeare, ii. 85-7, 96;<br/>

  <i>Old Bachelor</i>, iii. 187;<br/>

  Pope's <i>Iliad</i> dedicated to him, iv. 50, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Way of the World</i>, i. 494, n. 1; ii. 227;<br/>

  writings, his, make no man better, i. 189, n. 1.<br/>

CONINGTON, Professor,<br/>

  Goldsmith's epitaph and Johnson's Latin, iii. 82, n. 3.<br/>

CONJECTURES, how far useful, ii. 260.<br/>

CONJUGAL INFIDELITY, ii. 56; iii. 347, 406.<br/>

<i>Connoisseur, The</i>, i. 420; ii. 334, n. 3.<br/>

CONNOR, ——, (Conn), a priest, v. 227, n. 4.<br/>

CONSCIENCE, defined by Johnson, ii. 243;<br/>

  liberty of it, ii. 249.<br/>

<i>Conscious Lovers</i>, i. 491, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Considerations on the Case of Dr. Trapp's Sermons. See</i> Dr. TRAPP.<br/>

<i>Considerations on Corn</i>. See under CORN.<br/>

<i>Considerations on the Dispute between Crousaz and Warburton</i>, i. 157.<br/>

<i>Considerations upon the Embargo</i>, i. 503.<br/>

CONSOLATION, ii. 13.<br/>

<i>Consort</i> defined, i. 149, n. 2.<br/>

CONST, Mr., iii. 16, n. 1.<br/>

CONSTANTINOPLE, iv. 28.<br/>

CONSTITUENT, iv. 30, n. 4.<br/>

CONSTITUTION, Johnson asked to write on it, ii. 441.<br/>

CONSTITUTIONAL SOCIETY, iii. 314, n. 6.<br/>

<i>Construction of Fireworks</i>, v. 246, n. 1.<br/>

CONSTRUCTIVE TREASON, iv. 87.<br/>

<i>Contemplation</i>, v. 117, n. 4.<br/>

CONTENT, nobody is content, iii. 241.<br/>

CONTI, Prince of, ii. 405, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Continuation of Dr. Johnson's Criticism on the Poems of Gray</i>,<br/>

iv. 392, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Continuity</i>, iii. 419, n. 1.<br/>

CONTRADICTION, iii. 386; iv. 280.<br/>

CONTROVERSIES, ii. 442; iii. 10.<br/>

CONVENTS. See MONASTERIES.<br/>

<i>Conversable</i>, v. 437, n. 1.<br/>

CONVERSATION, coming close to a man in it, iv. 179;<br/>

  contest, not animated without a, ii. 444;<br/>

  is a contest, ii. 450;<br/>

  eminent men often have little power in it, iv. 19;<br/>

  envy excited by superiority, iv. 195;<br/>

  game, like a, ii. 231;<br/>

  Johnson's description of the happiest kind, ii. 359; iv. 50;<br/>

  knowledge got by reading compared with that got by it, ii. 361;<br/>

  old and young, of the, ii. 443, 444, n. 1;<br/>

  praise instantly reverberated, v. 59;<br/>

  requisites for it, iv. 166;<br/>

  rich trader without it, iv. 83;<br/>

  solid, unsuitable for dinner parties, iii. 57;<br/>

  talk, distinguished from, iv. 186.<br/>

  See JOHNSON, Conversation.<br/>

<i>Conversation between His Most Sacred Majesty</i>, etc., ii. 34, n. 1.<br/>

CONVERSIONS, ii. 105; iii. 228.<br/>

CONVICT, a, unjustly condemned to death, ii. 285, n. 1.<br/>

CONVICTS, punished by being set to work, iii. 268;<br/>

  religious discipline for them, iv. 329;<br/>

  sent to America, ii. 312, n. 3.<br/>

CONVOCATION, i. 464; iv. 277.<br/>

CONWAY, General, ii. 12, n. 1.<br/>

CONWAY, Mr. Moncure, i. 85, n. 2.<br/>

COOK, Captain, Boswell meets him, iii. 7;<br/>

  Hawkesworth's edition of his <i>Voyages</i>, ii. 247, n. 5; iii. 7; iv. 308.<br/>

COOK, Professor, of St. Andrews, v. 64.<br/>

COOKE, Thomas (<i>Hesiod</i> Cooke), v. 37.<br/>

COOKE, Thomas, the engraver, iv. 421, n, 2.<br/>

COOKE, William (<i>Conversation</i> Cooke), ii. 100, n. 1; iv. 254, 437.<br/>

COOKERY, Mrs. Glasse's Cookery, iii. 285.<br/>

  See JOHNSON, Cookery.<br/>

COOKSEY, John, ii. 319, n. 1.<br/>

COOLEY, William, i. 503.<br/>

COOPER, John Gilbert, last of the <i>Benevolists</i>, iii. 149, n. 2;<br/>

  story of his sick son, ib.;<br/>

  Johnson the Caliban of literature, calls, ii. 129;<br/>

    anecdote of—and Garrick, iv. 4;<br/>

  'Punchinello,' ii. 129.<br/>

COOPER, M., a bookseller, v. 117, n. 4.<br/>

COOTE, Sir Eyre, account of him, v. 124, n. 2;<br/>

  travels in Arabia, v. 125.<br/>

COOTE, Lady, v. 125-6.<br/>

COPENHAGEN, v. 46, n, 2.<br/>

COPLEY, John, iv. 402, n. 2.<br/>

COPPER WORKS, at Holywell, iii. 455; v. 441.<br/>

<i>Copy</i>, manuscript for printing, iii. 42, n. 2.<br/>

COPY-MONEY, in Italy, iii. 162.<br/>

COPY-RIGHT, Act of Queen Anne, i. 437, n. 2; iii. iii. 294;<br/>

  debate on the copy-right bill, i. 304, n. 1;<br/>

  Donaldson's invasion of supposed right, i. 437;<br/>

    judgment of the House of Lords, ib.; ii. 272, n, 2; iii. 370;<br/>

    opinion of the Scotch judges, v. 50,72;<br/>

    Thurlow's speech, ii. 345, n. 2;<br/>

  honorary copy-right, iii. 370;<br/>

  Johnson's plea for one, i. 437, n. 1;<br/>

    should not be a perpetuity, i. 439; ii. 259;<br/>

  London Booksellers, claim of the, iii. 110;<br/>

  metaphysical right in authors, ii. 259.<br/>

CORBET, Andrew, i. 45, n. 4, 58, n. 1.<br/>

CORDELIA, i. 70, n. 2.<br/>

CORELLI, ii. 342.<br/>

CORIAT (Coryat) Tom, ii, 175;<br/>

<i>Crudities</i>, 176, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Coriat Junior</i>, ii. 175.<br/>

CORKE AND ORRERY, fifth Earl of. See ORRERY.<br/>

CORKE AND ORRERY, sixth Earl of, i. 257, n. 3.<br/>

CORN, bounty on corn (Irish), ii. 130, n. 3;<br/>

    (English), i. 519; iii. 232;<br/>

  corn-riots in 1766, 1. 519; iv. 317, n. 1;<br/>

  exportation, prohibited by proclamation, iv. 317, n. 1;<br/>

  last year of it, iii. 232, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson's <i>Considerations on Corn</i>, i. 518; iii. 232, n. 1;<br/>

  plentiful in the spring of 1778, iii. 226;<br/>

  previous bad harvests, ib., n. 2;<br/>

  price artificially raised, iii. 232, n. 1.<br/>

CORNBURY, Lord, ii. 425.<br/>

CORNEILLE, character of Richelieu, ii. 134, n. 4;<br/>

  compared with Shakespeare, iv. 16;<br/>

  goes round the world, v. 311.<br/>

CORNELIUS NEPOS, iv. 180.<br/>

CORNEWALL, Speaker, iii. 82, n. 2.<br/>

CORNISH FISHERMEN, iv. 78.<br/>

CORNWALLIS, Archbishop of Canterbury, iii. 125.<br/>

CORNWALLIS, Lord, his capitulation, iii. 355, n. 3; iv. 140, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Corps</i>, a pun on it, ii, 241.<br/>

CORPULENCY, iv. 213.<br/>

CORRECTION OF PROOF-SHEETS, iv. 321, n. 2.<br/>

CORSICA, Antipodes, like the, ii. 4, n. 1;<br/>

  Boswell's subscription for ordnance, ii. 59, n. 1;<br/>

  'dangers of the night,' i. 119, n. 1;<br/>

  France, ceded to, ii. 59, n. 2;<br/>

  Genoa, revolts from, ii. 59, n. 2, 71, n. 1, 80;<br/>

  hangman, i. 408, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson declaims against the people, ii. 80;<br/>

  <i>lingua rustica</i>, ii. 82;<br/>

  Seneca's epigrams on it, v. 296;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 201.<br/>

<i>Corsica, Boswell's Account of</i>,<br/>

  Johnson's advice about it, ii. II, 22;<br/>

  praise of the <i>Journal</i>, ii. 70;<br/>

  publication and success, ii. 46;<br/>

    criticisms on it, ib., n. 1;<br/>

  Preface quoted, ii. 69, n. 3;<br/>

  translations, ii. 46, n. 1, 56, n. 2.<br/>

CORTE, ii. 2, 3, n. 1; v. 237.<br/>

<i>Corteggianno, Il</i>, v. 276.<br/>

'CORYCIUS SENEX,' iv. 173.<br/>

COTTAGE, happiness in a, See RUSTIC HAPPINESS.<br/>

COTTERELL, Admiral, i. 245.<br/>

COTTERELL, Mrs., i. 450, n. 1.<br/>

COTTERELLS, the Miss, i. 245-6, 369, 382.<br/>

COTTON, Sir Lynch Salusbury, v. 433-4.<br/>

COTTON, Lady Salusbury, v. 442, n. 3.<br/>

COTTON, Robert, ii. 282, n. 3; v. 433; n. 5, 435, n. 2.<br/>

COULSON, Rev. Mr., ii. 381, n. 2; v. 459, n. 4.<br/>

COUNCIL OF TRENT, ii. 105.<br/>

<i>Council of Trent, History of the</i>, i. 107, 135.<br/>

COUNTESS, anecdote of a, iv. 274.<br/>

COUNTING, awkward at counting money, iv. 27;<br/>

  effects of it, iv. 4, n. 4, 204;<br/>

  modern practice, iii. 356, n. 3;<br/>

  nation that cannot count, v. 242.<br/>

COUNTRY GENTLEMEN,<br/>

  artificially raise the price of corn, iii. 232, n. 1;<br/>

  disconcerted at laying out ten pounds, iv. 4;<br/>

  duty to reside on their estates, iii. 177, 249;<br/>

  hospitality, iv. 204, 221;<br/>

  living beyond their income, v. 112;<br/>

  living in London, iv. 164;<br/>

  parliament, reason for entering, iii. 234;<br/>

  prisoners in a jail, v. 108;<br/>

  stewards, should be their own, v. 56;<br/>

  superiority over their people, iv. 164;<br/>

  tedious hours, ii. 194;<br/>

  wives should visit London, iii. 178.<br/>

COUNTRY LIFE, meals wished for from vacuity of mind, v. 159;<br/>

  mental imprisonment, iv. 338;<br/>

  neighbours, v. 352-3;<br/>

  pleasure soon exhausted, iii. 303;<br/>

  popularity seeking, iii. 353;<br/>

  science, good place for studying a, iii. 253;<br/>

  time at one's command, iii. 353.<br/>

COURAGE, not a Christian virtue, iii. 289;<br/>

  reckoned the greatest of virtues, ii. 339; iii. 266;<br/>

  mechanical, ib.;<br/>

  respected even when associated with vice, iv. 297.<br/>

COURAVER, Dr., i. 107, 135; iv. 127, n. 2.<br/>

COURT, attendants on it, i. 333;<br/>

  manners best learnt at small courts, v. 276.<br/>

COURT, 'A shilling's worth of court for six-pence worth of good,' ii. 10.<br/>

COURT-MOURNING, iv. 325.<br/>

COURT OF SESSION. See SCOTLAND.<br/>

<i>Court of Session Garland. See</i> BOSWELL.<br/>

COURTENAY, John,<br/>

  Boswell to make a cancel in the <i>Life</i>, persuades, i. 520;<br/>

    receives his vow of comparative sobriety, ii. 436, n. 1;<br/>

  Jenyns, Soame, i. 316;<br/>

    member of the Literary Club, i. 479;<br/>

    <i>Moral and Literary Character of Dr. Johnson</i>, descriptions of<br/>

Boswell, i. 223; ii. 268;<br/>

  Johnson's English poetry, i. 181, n. 3;<br/>

    in the Hebrides, ii. 268;<br/>

    humanity, iv. 322, n. 1;<br/>

    Latin poetry, i. 62;<br/>

    rapid composition, iv. 381, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Rasselas</i>, i. 344;<br/>

    style and 'school,' i. 222;<br/>

  Reynolds's dinner-parties, iii. 375, n. 2;<br/>

  Strahan, Rev. Mr., iv. 376, n. 4;<br/>

  Swift's <i>Tale of a Tub</i>, ii. 319, n. 1;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 305. 310; iv. 315.<br/>

COURTING THE GREAT,<br/>

  Johnson opposed to it, i. 131;<br/>

    his advice about it, ii. 10.<br/>

COURTNEY, Mr. Leonard H., M.P., i. 376, n. 2.<br/>

COURTOWN, Lord, ii. 376.<br/>

COURTS OF JUSTICE, afraid of Wilkes, iii. 46, n. 5.<br/>

COURTS-MARTIAL, Dicey, Professor, on them, iii. 46, n. 5;<br/>

  Johnson present at one, iii. 361;<br/>

  one of great importance, iv. 12.<br/>

COVENT GARDEN. See LONDON.<br/>

<i>Covent Garden Journal</i>, ii. 119, n. 4.<br/>

COVENTRY, i. 357; iv. 402, n. 2.<br/>

COVENTRY, Lady, v. 353, n. 1; 359, n. 2.<br/>

COVERLEY, Sir Roger de. See ADDISON.<br/>

<i>Covin</i>, ii. 199.<br/>

COVINGTON, Lord, iii. 213.<br/>

Cow, shedding its horns, iii. 84, n. 2.<br/>

COWARDICE, mutual, iii. 326.<br/>

COWDRY, iv. 160.<br/>

COWLEY, Abraham, 'Cowley, Mr. Abraham,' iv. 325, n. 3;<br/>

  Dryden's youth, the darling of, iv. 38, n. 1;<br/>

  fashion, out of, iv. 102, n. 2;<br/>

  Hurd's <i>Selections</i>, iii. 29, 227;<br/>

  <i>Imitation of Horace</i>, i. 284, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson meditated an edition of his works, iii. 29;<br/>

    ridicules the fiction of love, i. 179;<br/>

    writes his <i>Life</i>, iv. 38;<br/>

  life, on, iv. 154;<br/>

  love poems, ii. 78, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Ode to Liberty</i>, iv. 154, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Ode to Mr. Hobs</i>, ii. 241, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Ode upon the Restoration</i>, v. 333, n. 3;<br/>

  Pope, compared with, v. 345;<br/>

  vows, on, iii. 357, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Wit and Loyalty</i>, v. 57, n. 2;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 252, n. 3.<br/>

COWLEY, Father, ii. 399, n. 3.<br/>

COWPER, Earl, iii. 16, n. 1.<br/>

COWPER, J. G. See COOPER.<br/>

COWPER, William, annihilation, longs for, iii. 296, n. 1;<br/>

  avenues, v. 439, n. 1;<br/>

  Beckford and Rigby, anecdote of, iii. 76, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Biographia Britannica</i>, lines on the, iii. 174, n. 3;<br/>

  Browne, I. H., anecdote of, v. 156, n. i;<br/>

  Churchill's poetry, admires, i. 419, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Collins's Life</i>, reads, i. 382, n. 7;<br/>

  <i>Connoisseur</i>, contributes to the, i. 420, n. 3;<br/>

  dreads a vacant hour, i. 144, n. 2;<br/>

  'dunces sent to roam,' iii. 459;<br/>

  Heberden, praises, iv. 228, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Homer</i>, translates, iii. 333, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>John Gilpin</i>, iv. 138, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson's 'conversion,' iv. 272, n. 1;<br/>

    criticism of Milton, iv. 42, n. 7;<br/>

    writes an epitaph on, ii. 225, n. 3; iv. 424, n. 2;<br/>

    recommends his first volume, iii. 333, n. 2;<br/>

  Mediterranean as a subject for a poem, iii. 36, n. 3;<br/>

  Milton, undertakes an edition of, i. 319, n. 4;<br/>

  Omai, the 'gentle savage,' iii. 8, n. 1;<br/>

  overwhelmed by the responsibility of an office, iv. 98, n. 3;<br/>

  Pope's <i>Homer</i>, criticises, iii. 257, n. 1;<br/>

  'Scripture is still a trumpet to his fears,' iv. 300, n. 1;<br/>

  silence, habit of, iii. 307, n. 2;<br/>

  'the solemn fop,' i. 266, n. 1;<br/>

  'The sweet vicissitudes of day and night,' v. 117, n. 4;<br/>

  Thurlow's character, draws, iv. 349, n. 3;<br/>

    experiences his neglect, ib.;<br/>

  Unwins, introduced to the, i. 522;<br/>

  Westminster School, at, i. 395, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Whole Duty of Man</i>, despises the, ii. 239, n. 4.<br/>

COX, Mr., a solicitor, iv. 324.<br/>

<i>Coxcomb</i>, ii. 129; iii. 245, n. 1; v. 377, 378, n. 1.<br/>

COXETER, Thomas, iii. 30, n. 1; iii. 158.<br/>

COXETER,—, the younger, iii. 158, iv. n. 1.<br/>

COXHEATH CAMP, iii. 365, 374.<br/>

CRABBE, Rev. George,<br/>

  Johnson revises <i>The Village</i>, iv. 121, n. 4, 175.<br/>

CRADOCK, Joseph, account of him, iii. 38;<br/>

  Garrick at the Literary Club, iii. 311, n. 3;<br/>

  Goldsmith and Gray, i. 404, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Hermes and Tristram Shandy</i> ii, 225, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson at a tavern dinner, i. 470, n. 2;<br/>

    compliment to Goldsmith, iii. 82, n. 3;<br/>

    parody of Percy, ii. 136, n. 4;<br/>

    words should be written in a book, iii, 39;<br/>

  Percey's character, iii. 276, n. 2;<br/>

  Shakespeare Jubilee, ii. 68, n. 2;<br/>

  Warburton's reading, ii. 36, n. 2.<br/>

CRAGGS, James, Pope's epitaph on him, iv. 444;<br/>

  mentioned with his son, i. 160.<br/>

CRAIG, ——, the architect, James Thomson's nephew, iii. 360; v. 68.<br/>

CRANMER, Archbishop, ii, 364, n. 1.<br/>

CRANMER, George, ii, 364, n. 3.<br/>

CRANSTON, David, v. 406.<br/>

CRASHAW, Richard, iii. 304, n. 3.<br/>

CRAVEN, Lord, i. 337, n. 1.<br/>

CRAVEN, Lady, iii. 22.<br/>

<i>Creation</i>, Blackmore's, ii. 108.<br/>

CREATOR, compared with the creature, iv. 30-1.<br/>

CREDULITY, general, v. 389<br/>

CREEDS, v. 120.<br/>

CRESCIMBENI, i. 278.<br/>

CRICHTON, Robert, Lord Sanquhar, v. 103, n. 3.<br/>

CRISP, Samuel, iv. 239, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Critical Review</i>,<br/>

  account of it, owned by Hamilton, ii. 226, n. 3;<br/>

  edited by Smollett, iii. 32, n. 2;<br/>

<i>Critical Strictures</i> reviewed, i. 409, n. 1;<br/>

  Griffiths and the Monthly, attack on, iii. 32, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson reviews Graham's <i>Telemachus</i>, i. 411;<br/>

    and <i>The Sugar Cane</i>, i. 481, n. 4;<br/>

    description of a valley<br/>

    praised, v. 141, n. 2;<br/>

  Lyttelton's gratitude for a review, iv. 57;<br/>

  Murphy attacked, i. 355;<br/>

  payment to writers, iv. 214, n. 2;<br/>

  principles good, ii. 40; iii. 32;<br/>

  Rutty's <i>Diary</i> reviewed, iii. 170;<br/>

  reviewers write from their own mind, iii. 32.<br/>

CRITICISM, examples of true, ii. 90;<br/>

  justified, i. 409;<br/>

  negative, v. 322.<br/>

CRITICS, authors very rarely hurt by them, iii. 423.<br/>

  See ATTACKS.<br/>

CROAKER. See GOLDSMITH.<br/>

CROFT, Rev. Herbert, advice to a pupil, iv. 308;<br/>

  <i>Family Discourses</i>, iv. 298;<br/>

  <i>Life of Young</i>, his, adopted by Johnson, iv. 58;<br/>

    described by Burke, iv. 59;<br/>

    quoted, i. 373, n. 2.<br/>

CROKER, Rt. Hon. John Wilson. (In this Index I give reference only to<br/>

the passages in which I differ from him.)<br/>

  Bentley's verses, change in one of, iv. 23. n. 3;<br/>

  Boswell's account of Johnson's death, iv. 399, n. 1;<br/>

  Boswell's 'injustice' to Hawkins, iv. 138, n. 2;<br/>

  Burke's praise of Johnson's <i>Journey</i>, iii. 137, n. 3;<br/>

  Campbell, Dr. T., mistake about, ii. 343, n. 2;<br/>

  'a celebrated friend,' iii. 409, n. 6;<br/>

  Chesterfield's present to Johnson, i. 261, n.,3;<br/>

  <i>Edinburgh Review</i> and his 'blunders,' ii. 338, n. 2;<br/>

  emendations of the text, i. 16; iii. 426, n. 2;<br/>

  Fitzherbert's suicide, iii. 384, n. 4;<br/>

  Fox, Lady Susan, and W. O'Brien, ii. 328, n. 3;<br/>

  Homer's shield of Achilles, iv. 33, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's <i>Abridgment of the Dictionary</i>, i. 303, n. 1;<br/>

    Debates, i. 509;<br/>

    'ear spoilt by flattery,' i. 60, n. 2;<br/>

    and Hon. T. Hervey, ii. 33, n. 2;<br/>

    and Jackson, iii, 137 n. 2;<br/>

    <i>London</i>, Thales and Savage, i. 125 n. 4;<br/>

    memory of Gray's lines, iv. 138, n. 4;<br/>

    and <i>The Monthly Review</i>, iii. 30, n. 1;<br/>

    and the rebellion of 1745, i. 176, n. 2;<br/>

    reference to Lord Kames, iii, 340, n. 2;<br/>

    title of Doctor, i. 488, n. 3;<br/>

  Langton's will, ii. 261, n. 2;<br/>

  Lawrences, date of the deaths of the two, iv. 230, n. 2;<br/>

  Literary Clubs, records of the, ii. 345 n. 5;<br/>

  Macaulay's criticisms on him, i, 157, n. 5; ii. 391, n. 4;<br/>

iv. 144, n. 2; v. 234, n. 1; 298, n. 1;<br/>

  Mayo, Dr. and Dr. Meyer, ii. 253, n. 2;<br/>

  Millar, Andrew, i. 287, n. 3;<br/>

    proofs and sanctions, ii. 194, n. 2;<br/>

  Montagu, Edward, iii. 408, n. 3;<br/>

  Romney, George, iii. 43, n. 4;<br/>

  Sacheverel at Lichfield i. 39;<br/>

  suppression of a note, iv. 138, n. 2;<br/>

  suspicions about Thurlow's letter to Reynolds, iv. 350, n. 1;<br/>

    about one of Johnson's amanuenses, iv. 262, n. 1;<br/>

  Taylors of Christ Church, confounds two, i. 76, n. 1;<br/>

  Walpole, Horace, identifies with a celebrated wit, iii. 388, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Croker Correspondence</i>,<br/>

  Johnson's definition of <i>Oats</i>, 1. 294, n. 8;<br/>

    and Pot, iv. 5, n. 1;<br/>

    sarcasms about trees in Scotland, ii. 301, n. 1;<br/>

  mistake about the third Earl of Liverpool, iii. 146, n. 1.<br/>

Cromwell, Henry, Pope's correspondent, iv. 246, n. 5.<br/>

Cromwell, Oliver,<br/>

  Aberdeen, his soldiers in, ii. 455; v. 84;<br/>

  Bowles, W., married his descendant, iv. 235, n. 5;<br/>

  Johnson and Lord Auchinleck quarrel over him, v. 382;<br/>

  Johnson projects a <i>Life</i> of him, iv. 233;<br/>

  Noble's <i>Memoirs</i>, iv. 236, n. 1;<br/>

  political principles in his time, ii. 369;<br/>

  Speeches, his, i. 150, n. 2;<br/>

  trained as a private man, i. 442, n. 1.<br/>

Crosbie, Andrew, account of him, ii. 376, n. 1;<br/>

  alchymy, learned in, ii. 376;<br/>

  compares English with Scotch, v. 20;<br/>

  Scotch schoolmaster's case, ii. 186. n. 1;<br/>

  witchcraft, on, v. 45;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 101; v. 46.<br/>

Crosby, Brass, attacked by Johnson, ii. 135, n. 1;<br/>

  Lord Mayor, iii. 459;<br/>

  sent to the Tower, ib.; iv. 140, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Cross Readings</i>, iv. 322.<br/>

Crotch, Dr. William, iii. 197, n. 3.<br/>

Crouch, Mrs., iv. 227.<br/>

Crousaz, John Peter de, dispute with Warburton, i. 157; v. 80;<br/>

  <i>Examen of Pope's Essay on Man</i>, i. 137.<br/>

Crown, childish jealousy of it, ii. 170;<br/>

  dispensing power, iv. 317, n. 1;<br/>

  influence: See INFLUENCE;<br/>

  power, has not enough, ii. 170;<br/>

  revenues, its, ii. 353, n. 4;<br/>

  right to it, iii. 156-7.<br/>

<i>Crudities</i>, Coryat's, ii. 176, n. 1.<br/>

Cruikshank, the surgeon,<br/>

  attends Johnson, iv. 239-240, 399; ib. n. 6;<br/>

  bequest to him, iv. 402, n. 2;<br/>

  letter from, iv. 365;<br/>

  recommends him to Reynolds, iv. 219.<br/>

Crutchley, Jeremiah, iv. 202, n. 1.<br/>

Cucumbers, v. 289.<br/>

<i>Cui bono</i> man, a, iv. 112.<br/>

Cullen, Dr., an eminent physician, ii. 372;<br/>

  his opinion on Johnson's case, iv. 262-4;<br/>

  on the needful quantity of sleep, iii. 169;<br/>

  talks of sleep-walking, v. 46.<br/>

Cullen, Robert, the advocate (afterwards Lord Cullen),<br/>

  case of Knight the negro, iii. 127, 213;<br/>

  a good mimic, ii. 154, n. 1;<br/>

  mentioned, v. 44-5.<br/>

Culloden, Battle of, cruelties after it, v. 159, 196;<br/>

  Johnson's indifference as to the result, i. 430;<br/>

  the news reaches London, v. 196, n. 3;<br/>

  order of the clans, ii. 270, n. 1;<br/>

  Pretender's criticism of the battle, v. 194;<br/>

  mentioned, v. 140, 187, 190.<br/>

Culrossie,—, v. 342, n. 2.<br/>

CUMBERLAND, v. 113, n. 1.<br/>

CUMBERLAND, William, Duke of, uncle of George III,<br/>

  cruelties, ii. 374, 375, n. 1; v. 196;<br/>

  attacked by Dr. King at Oxford, i. 279, n. 5;<br/>

  praised by the <i>Gent. Mag</i>., i. 176, n. 2;<br/>

  Shipley, Dr., his chaplain, iii. 251, n. 5;<br/>

  mentioned, v. 188.<br/>

CUMBERLAND, Duchess of, iv. 108, n. 4.<br/>

CUMBERLAND, Richard, Bentley on Barnes's Greek, iv. 19, n. 2;<br/>

  Davies's stories, perhaps the subject of one of, iii. 40, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>dish-clout</i> face, iv. 384, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Fashionable Lover</i>, v. 176;<br/>

  <i>Feast of Reason</i>, iv. 64;<br/>

  Johnson, acquaintance with, iv. 384, n. 2;<br/>

  not admitted into 'the set,' ib.;<br/>

    cups of tea, i. 313, n. 3;<br/>

    dress, iii. 325, n. 3;<br/>

    Greck, iv. 384;<br/>

    mode of eating, i. 468, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Observer</i>, iv. 64, 385;<br/>

  <i>Odes</i>, iii. 43;<br/>

  read backwards, ib., n. 3; iv. 432;<br/>

  Westminster School, at, i. 395, n. 2.<br/>

CUMBERLAND AND STRATHERN, Duke of,<br/>

  brother of George III, ii. 224, n. 1; iii. 21, n. 2.<br/>

CUMMING, Tom, the Quaker, account of him, v. 98, n. 1;<br/>

  introduces Johnson to a tavern company, v. 230;<br/>

  ready to drive an ammunition cart, iv. 212;<br/>

  wrote against Leechman, v. 101.<br/>

CUNINGHAME, Alexander, the opponent of Bentley, v. 373.<br/>

CUNINGHAME, Sir John, v. 373.<br/>

CUNNING, v. 217.<br/>

CUNNINGHAM,——, of the Scots Greys, iv. 211, n. 1.<br/>

CURATES, scanty provision for them, ii. 173;<br/>

  small salaries, iii. 138.<br/>

CURIOSITY, mark of a generous mind, i. 89, iii. 450, 454;<br/>

  two objects of it, iv, 199.<br/>

CURLL, Edmund, i. 143, n. 1.<br/>

CURLANTS, iv. 206.<br/>

CUST, F. C., i. 161, n. 3, 170, n. 1.<br/>

CUTTS, Lady, iii. 228.<br/>

<i>Cyder</i>, Philips's, v. 78.<br/>

<i>Cypress Grove</i>, v. 180.<br/>
</p>

<h3>D.</h3>

<p>D. O., Sir, iv. 181, n. 3.<br/>

DACIER, Madame, in. 333, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Dacier's Horace</i>, in. 74, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Demonology</i>, King James's, iii. 382.<br/>

DAGGE, ——, keeper of the Bristol Newgate, iii. 433, n. 1.<br/>

DAILLÉ, <i>on the Fathers</i>, v. 294.<br/>

<i>Daily Advertiser</i>, i. 256, n. 1; ii. 209, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Daily Gazetteer</i>, ii. 33, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Daily Post</i>, i. 503.<br/>

DALE, Mrs., v. 431.<br/>

D'ALEMBERT, ii. 54, n. 3.<br/>

DALIN, Olaf von, ii. 156.<br/>

DALLAS, Miss, v. 87.<br/>

DALLAS, Stuart, v. 87.<br/>

DALRYMPLE, Colonel, v. 399.<br/>

DALRYMPLE, Sir David. See HAILES, Lord.<br/>

DALRYMPLE, Sir John,<br/>

  attacks the London booksellers, v. 402, n. 1;<br/>

  Burnet, criticises, ii. 213, n. 3;<br/>

  complains of attacks on his <i>Memoirs</i>, v. 400;<br/>

  foppery, his, ii. 237;<br/>

  Johnson, invites to his house, v. 401;<br/>

    rails at, v. 402;<br/>

    arrives late, v. 404;<br/>

  <i>Memoirs of Great Britain<br/>

    and Ireland</i>, ii. 210-1;<br/>

  parodied by Johnson, v. 403;<br/>

    style, 'mere bouncing,' ii. 210;<br/>

  praised by Boswell, ii. 211;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 291.<br/>

DALZEL, Professor, iv. 385.<br/>

DANCALA, i. 88.<br/>

DANCING, iv. 79.<br/>

DANES, colony at Leuchars, v. 70;<br/>

  in Wales, v. 130.<br/>

DANTE, Boswell's ignorance of him, iii. 229, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Purgatory</i>, quoted, iv. 373, n. 1;<br/>

  resemblance between <i>Pilgrim's Progress</i> and Dante, ii. 238.<br/>

DANUBE, ii. 133, n. 1.<br/>

D'ARBLAY, General, iv. 223, n. 4.<br/>

D'ARBLAY, Mme. See BURNEY, Miss.<br/>

DARBY, Rev. Mr., v. 453, n. 2.<br/>

DARIPPE, Captain, v. 135.<br/>

DARIUS'S shade, iv. 16.<br/>

DARLINGTON, i. 35, n. 1.<br/>

DARTINEUF, Charles, ii. 447.<br/>

DARTMOUTH, Lord, i. 407, n. 1.<br/>

DARWIN, Charles, v. 428, n. 3.<br/>

DARWIN, Dr. Erasmus, v. 428, n. 3.<br/>

DASHWOOD, Sir Francis, ii. 135, n. 2.<br/>

DASHWOOD, Sir Henry, iii. 407, n. 5.<br/>

DATES to letters, i. 122, n. 2; iii. 421, n. 3, 428, n. 4.<br/>

D'AUTEROCHE, Count, iii. 8, n. 3.<br/>

DAVENANT, Sir William, ii. 168, n. 2.<br/>

DAVENPORT, William, Strahan's apprentice, ii. 324, n. 1.<br/>

DAVIES, Thomas, account of him, i. 390;<br/>

  author, success as an, iii. 434;<br/>

  bankruptcy, iii. 223, 434;<br/>

  Baretti's trial, exaggerated feelings about, ii. 94;<br/>

    quarrels with him, ii. 205;<br/>

  benefit at Drury Lane, iii. 249;<br/>

  bookseller, his taste as a, iii. 223, n. 1;<br/>

  Boswell to Johnson, introduces, i. 390; iv. 231;<br/>

  Churchill's lines on him, i. 391, n. 2, 483; iii. 223;<br/>

    sees in the pit, iii. 223, n. 2:<br/>

  Cibber's genteel ladies, ii. 340;<br/>

  'clapped on the back by Tom Davies,' ii. 344;<br/>

  <i>Conduct of the Allies</i>, ii. 65;<br/>

  dinners at his house, ii. 340; iii. 38;<br/>

  <i>Garrick, Memoirs of</i>. iii. 434, n. 5;<br/>

  Garrick, letter to, iii. 223, n. 2;<br/>

    complains of his unkindness, ib.;<br/>

  Goldsmith's dislike of Baretti, ii. 205, n. 3;<br/>

  'Goldy's' play, talks of, ii. 258; v. 308;<br/>

  Hunter, Johnson's schoolmaster, anecdote of, i. 45, n. 4;<br/>

  Johnson, accurate observer of, ii. 258;<br/>

    candour, iii. 271, n. 2;<br/>

    and Foote, ii. 299;<br/>

    forgives him, ii. 271;<br/>

    laugh, ii. 378;<br/>

    letters to him: See JOHNSON, letters;<br/>

    liberality to him, i. 488; iii. 223;<br/>

    love for him, iv. 231, 365;<br/>

    one of a deputation to, iii. III;<br/>

    sends pork to, iv. 413, n. 2;<br/>

    talking to himself, i. 483;<br/>

  learning enough for a clergyman, had, iv. 13;<br/>

  Maddocks, the straw-man, iii. 231, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Miscellanies and Fugitive Pieces</i>, ii. 270;<br/>

  Mounsey and Percy, ii. 64;<br/>

  portrait by Hicky, ii. 340, n. 2;<br/>

  'potted stories' of a dramatic author, iii. 40;<br/>

  Quin's saying about January 30, v. 382, n. 2;<br/>

  Shakespeare, representations of, v. 244, n. 2;<br/>

  stage, his earnings on the, iii. 223;<br/>

    driven from it, ib., iii. 249;<br/>

  'statesman all over,' ii. 65;<br/>

  Thane of Ross, iv. 8; Walker's<br/>

  'distinguished glare,' ii. 368, n. 3;<br/>

  zealous for the <i>trade</i>, ii. 345;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 175, n. 3, 310, 423; ii. 63, 82, 343-4, 349;<br/>

iii—38; iv. 366.<br/>

DAVIES, Mrs., Tom Davies's wife,<br/>

  Churchill's lines on her, i. 391, n. 2, 484.<br/>

DAVIES,—, of Llanerch, v. 439.<br/>

DAVIS, Mrs., iv. 239, n. 2, 439.<br/>

DAVY, Sir Humphry, iv. 119, n. 1.<br/>

DAVY, Serjeant, iii. 87, n. 3.<br/>

DAWKINS, 'Jamaica,' iv. 126.<br/>

<i>Dawling</i>, iii. 422;<br/>

<i>dawdle</i>, iv. 126.<br/>

DAWSON, George, ii. 456, n. 2.<br/>

DAWSON's <i>Lexicon</i>, iii. 407.<br/>

DAY-LABOURERS, wages of, iv. 176; v. 263.<br/>

DEAD, form of prayer for the, ii. 163;<br/>

  libels on them, iii. 13;<br/>

  recommending and praying for them, i. 190, n. 2, 236, 240; ii. 163;<br/>

iv. 137, 158, n. 3;<br/>

  their spirits perhaps present, i. 212;<br/>

  why we wish for their return, i. 240, n. 1.<br/>

DEAF AND DUMB, Academy for the, v. 399.<br/>

DEAN, Rev. Richard, ii. 53.<br/>

DEATH, act of dying not of importance, ii. 107;<br/>

  affectation in dying, v. 397;<br/>

  best men most afraid of it, iii. 154;<br/>

  Browne, Sir T., on it, iii. 153, n. 1;<br/>

  business preparation for it, v. 316;<br/>

  change beyond man's understanding, ii. 163, n. 3;<br/>

  dispositions on one's death-bed, v. 239;<br/>

  'dying with a grace,' iv. 300, n. 1;<br/>

  fear of it cannot be got over, ii. 106, 298; iii. 295;<br/>

  natural to man, ii. 93; iii. 153, 158, 294; v. 179;<br/>

  resolution, met with, iii. 295;<br/>

  sight, kept out of, iii. 154;<br/>

  some die well, few willingly, i. 365;<br/>

  sudden death in sin, iv. 225;<br/>

  Swift dreads it, ii. 93, n. 4;<br/>

    describes what reconciles man to it, iii. 295, n. 2;<br/>

  thinking constantly of it, v. 316;<br/>

  violent, i. 338;<br/>

    'a whole system of hopes swept away,' i. 236, n. 3.<br/>

  See under JOHNSON, death, dread of.<br/>

DEATH WARRANTS, iii. 121, n. 1; v. 239-40.<br/>

<i>Debate on the Proposal of Parliament to Cromwell</i>, i. 150.<br/>

DEBATES OF PARLIAMENT,<br/>

  account of them, i. 115-118, 150-152, 501-512;<br/>

    written at first by Guthrie and corrected by Johnson, i. 115-6,<br/>

136, 503, 509;<br/>

    written solely by Johnson, i. 118, 150-2, 157, 503;<br/>

    wrongly assigned to Johnson, i. 509;<br/>

  authenticity generally accepted, i. 152, 505;<br/>

  Chesterfield, speeches attributed to, iii. 351;<br/>

  Croker's inaccuracy about them, i. 509!<br/>

  'debating,' absence of, i. 506;<br/>

  discontinued, i. 176, n. 2, 512;<br/>

  Gent. Mag., increased sale of, i. 152, n. 1;<br/>

  House of Commons passes resolutions against publication, i. 115, 502, 510;<br/>

  House of Lords 'a Court of Record,' i. 502;<br/>

  'Hurgoes,' 'Clinabs,' 'Walelop,' 'Hon. Marcus Cato,' i. 502;<br/>

  'Pretor of Mildendo,' i. 503;<br/>

  Johnson's conscience troubled, i. 152, 505; iv. 408;<br/>

    <i>Debates</i> not authentic, i. 118, 503-9;<br/>

    rapid composition, i. 504; iv. 409;<br/>

    successor, i. 512;<br/>

  <i>London Magazine</i>, reports of the, i. 502, 508-510;<br/>

  monument to Walpole's greatness, i. 512;<br/>

  Murphy's account of them, i. 504;<br/>

  prosecution of Cave, i. 501;<br/>

    of Cooley and the printer of the <i>Daily Post</i>, i. 503;<br/>

    of the printers in 1771, iii. 459-60; iv. 140, n. 1;<br/>

  reports published chiefly in the recess, i. 501, 510;<br/>

  reporters, 'fellows who thrust themselves into the gallery,' i. 502;<br/>

  reporting, method of, i. 117, 150, 503, 504;<br/>

  Seeker's reports, i. 507, 509;<br/>

  'Senate of Lilliput,' i. 115, 502;<br/>

  speakers' names disguised, i. 501;<br/>

  speeches assigned to Pitt and Chesterfield, i. 504;<br/>

    many thrown into one, i. 501, 506-7;<br/>

  sent by the speakers, i. 151, 501, 508;<br/>

  table of the order of publication, i. 510;<br/>

  translated, i. 505;<br/>

  unreality, i. 506;<br/>

  volumes, collected in, i. 152;<br/>

  Walpole, unfair to, i. 502, 504; iv. 314.<br/>

<i>Debrett's Royal Kalendar</i>, iv. 350, n. 1.<br/>

DEBTOR. 'The pillow of a debtor,' iv. 152, n. 1.<br/>

DEBTS, carelessly contracted and rapidly swelling, iii. 127;<br/>

  for Johnson's warnings, see BOSWELL, debts;<br/>

  law of arrest, iii. 77;<br/>

  small and great, i. 347.<br/>

<i>Decay of Christian Piety</i>, v. 227.<br/>

<i>De Claris Oratoribus</i>, iv. 316.<br/>

DEDICATIONS, books written for their sake, iv. 105, n. 4;<br/>

  flattery allowed, v. 285;<br/>

  Johnson's to all the Royal Family, ii. 2;<br/>

    skill in them, ii. 1;<br/>

    <i>Works</i> without any, i. 257, n. 2;<br/>

  means of getting money, ii. 1, n. 2;<br/>

  one scholar dedicating to another, iv. 162, n. 1;<br/>

  studied conclusions, v. 239.<br/>

<i>Defence of Pluralities</i>, ii. 242.<br/>

DEFFAND, Mme. du, v. 152, n. 1.<br/>

DEFINITION, things sometimes made darker by it, iii. 245.<br/>

DEFINITIONS. See under DICTIONARY, and separate words.<br/>

DE FOE, Daniel, <i>Captain Carleton's Memoirs,</i> iv. 334, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Drelincourt on Death,</i> ii. 163, n. 4;<br/>

  his grandson, iv. 37, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson's praise of him, iii. 267;<br/>

    the opposite of him, i. 506;<br/>

  <i>Robinson Crusoe</i>, iii. 268.<br/>

<i>Deformities of Johnson</i>, iv. 148-9.<br/>

DEGENERACY OF MANKIND, ii. 217, v. 77.<br/>

DE GROOT, Isaac, iii. 125.<br/>

DEIST, no honest man one, ii. 8.<br/>

DELANY, Dr., <i>Observations on Swift</i>, iii. 249; iv. 39; v. 238.<br/>

DELAP, Rev. Dr., i. 521.<br/>

DELAY, danger of, i. 324.<br/>

<i>Dementat</i>, iv. 181, n. 3.<br/>

DEMOCRITUS, iv. 105, n. 4.<br/>

DEMONAX, iv. 34.<br/>

DE MORGAN, Professor, i. 284, n. 3.<br/>

DEMOSTHENES, Johnson compared with him, i. 504;<br/>

  spoke to barbarians, ii. 171;<br/>

  to brutes, ii. 211;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 351; v. 214.<br/>

DEMPSTER, George, account of him, i. 408, n. 4;<br/>

  argues for merit, i. 440-2;<br/>

  Boswell, letter to, v. 407;<br/>

  Boswell's eulogium on him, v. 409, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Critical Strictures</i>, i. 409;<br/>

  Johnson's conversation, struck with, i. 434;<br/>

    dines with, ii. 195;<br/>

    <i>Journey</i>, praises, ii. 303; iii. 301;<br/>

  sister, his, iii. 242; iv. 284;<br/>

  unfixed in his principles, i. 443;<br/>

  virtuous and candid, ii. 305.<br/>

DENBIGH, Earls of, ii. 175, n. 2.<br/>

DENHALL IN WIRHALL, v. 445, n. 3.<br/>

DENHAM, Sir John, iv. 38, n. 1.<br/>

DENMAN, first Lord, ii. 408, n. 3.<br/>

DENMARK, King of, v. 100.<br/>

DENMARK, Queen of, ii. 253, n. 2.<br/>

DENNIS, John,<br/>

  criticisms on <i>Blackmore</i> and <i>Cato</i>, iv. 36, n. 4;<br/>

    on <i>Cato</i>, iii. 40, n. 2;<br/>

    on Shakespeare, i. 498, n. <i>4</i>;<br/>

  <i>Critical Works</i> worth collecting, iii. 40;<br/>

  his thunder, iii. 40, n. 2.<br/>

DENTON, Judge, ii. 164, n. 5.<br/>

<i>Depeditation</i>, v. 130.<br/>

DEPOPULATION, ii. 217, n. 5.<br/>

DE QUINCEY, account of Bishop Watson, iv. 119, n. 1;<br/>

  criticises Johnson's <i>Vanity</i>, &amp;c., i. 193, n. 3;<br/>

  praises his Latin, i. 272, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Derange</i>, iii. 319, n. 1.<br/>

DERBY, account of it in 1741, i. 86, n. 2;<br/>

  Highlanders there in 1745, iii. 162; v. 196, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson and Boswell visit it in 1777, iii. 160;<br/>

    see the china-manufactory, iii. 163;<br/>

      silk-mill, iii. 164; v. 432;<br/>

  Johnson married there, i. 95, n. 2, 96;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 1, 135, n. 1; iv. 359.<br/>

DERBY, fifteenth Earl of, v. 354, n. 1.<br/>

DERBY, Rev. Mr., iii. 113.<br/>

DERBYSHIRE, ii. 474.<br/>

DERRICK, Samuel,<br/>

  Boswell's 'first tutor,' i. 456;<br/>

    his 'governor,' iii. 371;<br/>

    introduced him to Davies, iv. 231, n. 1;<br/>

  Dryden's <i>Miscellaneous Works</i>, edits, i. 456, n. 3;<br/>

  Home's parody on him, i. 456;<br/>

  <i>Humphry Clinker</i>, described in, i. 124, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's kindness for him, i. 385; v. 117, 240;<br/>

    projected <i>Life of Dryden</i>, gathers materials for, i. 456; v. 240;<br/>

    lines on, i. 124;<br/>

  'King of Bath,' i. 394, n. 2, 455;<br/>

  <i>Letters from Leverpoole</i>, i. 456, n. 1; v. 117;<br/>

  outrunning his character, i. 394;<br/>

  presence of mind, i. 457;<br/>

  pun about the Robinhood Society, iv. 92, n. 5;<br/>

  Smart, compared with, iv. 192.<br/>

DESCRIPTION, falls short of reality, iv. 199.<br/>

<i>Deserted Village</i>. See GOLDSMITH.<br/>

DES MAIZEAUX, i. 29.<br/>

DESMOULINS, John,<br/>

  Johnson's will, witnesses, iv. 402, n. 2;<br/>

    bequest to him, ib.;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 415, n. 1, 440.<br/>

DESMOULINS, Mrs., account of her, iii. 222, n. 3;<br/>

  hates Levett and Williams, iii. 368, 461;<br/>

  Johnson allows her half a guinea a week, iii. 222;<br/>

    death, present at, iv. 418;<br/>

    kitchen under her care, ii. 215, n. 4;<br/>

    house, lodged in, iii. 222, 380, n. 3;<br/>

      leaves it, iv. 233, 255, n. 1;<br/>

  not complaining of the world, iv. 171;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 64, 83, 237; ii. 148; iii. 313, 363,373;<br/>

iv. 92, 1422, 170, 210, 239, n. 2, 322, n. 1.<br/>

DESPONDENCY, speculative, iv. 112.<br/>

DESPOTIC GOVERNMENTS, iii. 283.<br/>

DE THOU. See THUANUS.<br/>

DETTINGEN, Battle of, iv. 12.<br/>

DEVAYNES, Mr., iv. 273.<br/>

<i>De veritate Religionis</i>, i. 68, n. 3.<br/>

DEVILS do not lie to each other, iii. 293;<br/>

  their influence upon our minds, iv. 290.<br/>

DEVONPORT, i. 379, n. 1.<br/>

DEVONSHIRE, Johnson's trip to, i. 37l, n. 3, 377; iii. 457;<br/>

  militia, its, i. 36, n. 4, 307, n. 4.<br/>

DEVONSHIRE, third Duke of,<br/>

  faithful to his word, iii. 186;<br/>

    dogged veracity, iii. 378.<br/>

DEVONSHIRE, fourth Duke of, ii. 78, n. 1.<br/>

DEVONSHIRE, fifth Duke and Duchess of,<br/>

  hospitality to Johnson, iv. 357, 367;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 126.<br/>

DEVONSHIRE, seventh Duke of,<br/>

  'public dinners at Chatsworth,' iv. 367, n. 3.<br/>

DEVONSHIRE, Georgiana, Duchess of,<br/>

  Genius made feminine to compliment her, iii. 374;<br/>

  Johnson, eager to hear, iii. 425, n. 4;<br/>

  painted in the same picture with him, iv. 224, n. 1.<br/>

DEVONSHIRE FAMILY, ii. 474.<br/>

DEVOTION, abstracted, ii. 10;<br/>

  particular places for, iv. 226.<br/>

<i>Devotional Exercises</i>. See PRAYERS.<br/>

DEVOTIONAL POETRY. See POETRY.<br/>

DE WITT, i. 32.<br/>

DEXTERITY, deserves applause, iii. 231.<br/>

<i>Diabolus Regis</i>, iii. 78.<br/>

DIAL, i. 205.<br/>

<i>Dialogues of the Dead</i>, ii. 447.<br/>

DIAMOND, ——, an apothecary, i. 242; iii. 454.<br/>

<i>Diary, The</i>, iv. 381, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Diary of a Visit to England in 1775</i>, ii. 338, n. 2.<br/>

DIBDEN, Charles, ii. 110.<br/>

DICEY, Professor,<br/>

  <i>Law of the Constitution</i>, iii. 46, n. 5; iv. 317, n. 1.<br/>

DICK, Sir Alexander, gold medal for rhubarb, iv. 263, n. 1;<br/>

  hospitality, his, iv. 204;<br/>

  Johnson consults him about his health, iv. 261-3;<br/>

    letter to, iii. 102, 128;<br/>

    meets, v. 48, 394, 401.<br/>

DICK, ——, a messenger, v. 201.<br/>

'DICK WORMWOOD,' ii. 407, n. 5.<br/>

DICKENS, Charles, iv. 202, n. 1.<br/>

DICTIONARY,<br/>

  might be compiled from Bacon, iii. 194;<br/>

    from Elizabethan authors, iii. 194, n. 2;<br/>

  'perfection' of one, i. 292, n. 2;<br/>

  pronunciation, of, ii. 161;<br/>

  Scotland,  of words peculiar to, ii. 91;<br/>

  watches,  like, i. 293, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Dictionary, Johnson's</i>,<br/>

  account of it, i. 182-9, 256-266, 291-301;<br/>

  <i>Abridgement</i>, i. 264, n. 4, 300, n. 1, 303, n. 1. 305;<br/>

    in Lord Scarsdale's dressing-room, iii. 161;<br/>

  accents of words, ii. 161;<br/>

  authors quoted, i. 189; iv. 4, 416, n. 2;<br/>

  Bacon often quoted, iii. 194;<br/>

  Birch, Dr., on it, i. 285;<br/>

  bound and lettered, i. 283;<br/>

  commencement, date of its, i. 182, n. 3;<br/>

  composition, its, i. 186-9;<br/>

  deficiency of previous, i. 187, n. 1;<br/>

  definitions, erroneous, i. 293;<br/>

  definitions, Johnson's genius shown in them, i. 293;<br/>

    instances of erroneous, i. 293;<br/>

    political and capricious, i. 294-6; iii. 343; iv. 87, n. 2, 217:<br/>

    See under separate words;<br/>

  dictionary-makers described, i. 189, n. 2;<br/>

  dictionary-making not very unpleasant, i. 189, n. 2; ii. 202, n. 2,<br/>

203, n. 3;<br/>

    'muddling work,' ib.;<br/>

  Dodsley's suggestion, i. 182, 286; iii. 405;<br/>

  drudgery, v. 418;<br/>

  etymologies, i. 186, 292;<br/>

  explanation, difficulty of, i. 294, n. 2;<br/>

  edition, fourth, preparing, ii. 142,143, n. 3, 155;<br/>

    sent to press, ii. 202, n. 2, 209;<br/>

    published, ii. 203, 205;<br/>

    mentioned, i. 293, n. 2, 294, n. 7, 295, n. 1, 375, n. 2;<br/>

iv. 4, n. 3, 87, n. 2;<br/>

  Garrick's <i>Epigram</i>, i. 300;<br/>

  Gifford's <i>Contemplation</i> quoted, v. 117, n. 4;<br/>

  Gough Square, compiled in, i. 188;<br/>

  Harris,<i>Hermes</i>, praised by, iii. 115;<br/>

  honours and praises, i. 298, 323;<br/>

  Johnson's portrait, iv. 421, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's  praise of its execution, iii. 405;<br/>

  Manning, the compositor, iv. 321;<br/>

  outlines sketched, its, i. 176;<br/>

  particles,  changes of the, ii. 45, n. 3;<br/>

  patrons and opponents, i. 288;<br/>

  payments, i. 183, 287, 304;<br/>

  <i>Plan</i>, dedicated to Lord Chesterfield, i. 183;<br/>

    draft of it, i. 185, n. 2;<br/>

    not noticed in <i>Gent. Mag.</i> i. 176, n. 2;<br/>

    published, i. 182;<br/>

  poetry, harder to write than, v. 47;<br/>

  Preface, i. 291-9;<br/>

  pronunciation, ii. 161, n. 1;<br/>

  published, i. 288, 291;<br/>

  publishers, i. 183;<br/>

  Sheridan's, R. B., compliment to it, iii. 115;<br/>

  Smith, Adam, reviewed by, i. 298, n. 2;<br/>

  time taken in writing, i. 186, 287, 291, 443;<br/>

  volume ii. begun, i. 255;<br/>

  Wilkes and the letter <i>H</i>, i. 300;<br/>

  words, big, i. 2l8;<br/>

  written in sickness and sorrow, i. 263, n. 1; iv. 427.<br/>

<i>Dictionary of Arts and Sciences</i> projected by Goldsmith, ii. 204, n. 2.<br/>

DIDEROT, Denys, anecdote of Hume, ii. 8, n. 4;<br/>

  on acting, iv. 244, n. 1.<br/>

DIDO, iv. 196.<br/>

<i>Dies Irae</i>, iii. 358, n. 3.<br/>

DIFFICULTIES, raising, iii. 11, n. 1.<br/>

DIGGS, the actor, i. 386, n. 1.<br/>

DILLY FAMILY, account of it, iii. 396, n. 2.<br/>

DILLY, Messrs. Edward and Charles, booksellers,<br/>

  Boswell's <i>Corsica</i>, publish, ii. 46, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Conversation between George III, &amp;c</i>., ii. 34, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Life of Johnson, ib.</i>;<br/>

  Chesterfield's <i>Miscellaneous Works</i>, publish, iii. 351;<br/>

  dinners at their house, ii. 247,  338; iii. 65-79, 284-300, 357-8,<br/>

392, n. 2; iv. 101-7, _ib., n 2, 278, 330; v. 57, n. 3;<br/>

    always gave a good dinner, iii. 285;<br/>

  hospitality to literary men, iii. 65;<br/>

  house, their, No. 22 in the Poultry, iii. 5, 65, n. 2;<br/>

  'patriotic friends,' their, iii. 66.<br/>

DILLY, Charles, comparative happiness, on, iii. 288;<br/>

  Johnson, letters  from, iii. 394; iv. 257;<br/>

  Milton's <i>Tractate on Education</i>, on, iii. 358;<br/>

  quotations for sale, account of, iv. 102, n. 1;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 396, n. 2; iv. 118, 126.<br/>

DILLY, Edward, Boswell, letter to, iii. 110;<br/>

  Boswell parts with him, iii. 396;<br/>

  <i>Lives of the Poets</i>, account of the, iii. 110;<br/>

  Johnson, letter from, iii. 126.<br/>

DILLY, Squire, Boswell and Johnson visit him, iv. 118-32;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 260; ii. 247; iii. 396, n. 2.<br/>

DINGLEY, Mrs., iv. 177, n. 2.<br/>

DINNER, cost in London in 1737, i. 103,105;<br/>

    in 1746, i. 103, n. 2;<br/>

    in Edinburgh, in 1742, ib.;<br/>

  a measure of emotion, i. 355; ii. 94; iv. 220;<br/>

  waiting for it, ii. 83;<br/>

  better where there is no solid conversation, iii. 57.<br/>

  See JOHNSON, dinners and eating.<br/>

DIOCLETIAN, ii. 255, n. 4.<br/>

DIOGENES LAERTIUS, iii. 386, n. 3; iv. 13.<br/>

DIOMED, ii. 129.<br/>

DIONYSIUS'S <i>Periegesis</i>, iv. 444.<br/>

Diot, Mr. and Mrs., v. 430.<br/>

<i>Dirleton's Doubts</i>, iii. 205.<br/>

<i>Disarrange</i>, iii. 319, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Discourses on Painting by Reynolds. See</i> REYNOLDS, <i>Discourses</i>.<br/>

DISCOVERIES, Johnson dislikes them, i. 455, n. 3; ii. 479;<br/>

iii. 204, n. 1; iv. 251, n. 1;<br/>

  Walpole describes the harm done by them, v. 276, n. 2, 328, n. 2.<br/>

DISEASES, acute and chronical, iv. 150.<br/>

DISLIKE, mutual, iii. 423.<br/>

DISPUTES, encouraging, iii. 185.<br/>

D'ISRAELI, Isaac, Barnes's <i>Homer</i>, iv. 19, n. 2;<br/>

  Birch, Dr., i. 159, n. 4;<br/>

  Campbell's <i>Hermippus Redivivus</i>, ii. 427, n. 4;<br/>

  Chatterton and Lord Mayor Beckford, iii. 201, n. 3;<br/>

  Churchill's abhorrence of blotting, i. 419, n. 5;<br/>

  Davies's taste as a  bookseller, iii. 223, n. 1;<br/>

  Dedications, ii. 1, n. 2;<br/>

  Dennis's thunder, iii. 40, n. 2;<br/>

  Du Halde's <i>China</i>, ii. 55, n. 4;<br/>

  Flexney and Stockdale, ii. 113, n. 2;<br/>

  Guthrie's letter, i. 117, n. 2;<br/>

  Hill, Sir John, ii. 39, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's hints for the <i>Life of Pope</i>, iv. 46, n. 1;<br/>

  Oldys the author of <i>Busy, curious, thirsty fly</i>, ii. 281, n. 5;<br/>

    his notes on Langbaine, iii. 30, n. 1;<br/>

  Pieresc, ii. 371, n. 2;<br/>

  Steevens's literary impostures, iv. 178, n. 1;<br/>

  Tasker, Rev. Mr., iii. 374, n. 1.<br/>

DISSENTERS, bill for their relief rejected, ii. 208, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Country</i>-party, of the, v. 255, n. 5;<br/>

  taught  the graces of language, i. 312;<br/>

  tossing snails into their gardens, ii. 268, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Dissertation on the Epitaphs written by Pope</i>, i. 306.<br/>

<i>Dissertation on the State of Literature and Authours</i>, i. 306.<br/>

<i>Dissertations on the History of Ireland</i>, i. 321.<br/>

<i>Dissertations on the Prophecies</i>, iv. 286.<br/>

DISSIMULATION, ii. 47.<br/>

DISTANCE, of time and of place, ii. 471.<br/>

DISTINCTIONS, all are trifles, iii. 355; love of them, i. 474.<br/>

<i>Distressed Mother</i>, Budgell's Epilogue_, i. 181;<br/>

  really written by Addison, iii. 46;<br/>

  Johnson's <i>Epilogue</i>, i. 55, n. 3.<br/>

DISTRESSES OF OTHERS, ii. 94-5.<br/>

DISTRUST, iii. 135.<br/>

<i>Diversions of Purley</i>, iii. 354, n. 2.<br/>

DIVES, ii. 162.<br/>

<i>Divine Legation</i>. See WARBURTON, W.<br/>

DIVINES, English, iv. 105, n. 3.<br/>

DIVORCES, iii. 347-8.<br/>

DIXEY, Sir Wolstan, i, 84.<br/>

DOBLE, Mr. C. E.,<br/>

  on the authorship of the <i>Whole Duty of Man</i>, ii. 239, n. 4;<br/>

  Psalmanazar at Christ Church, iii. 449.<br/>

<i>Dockers</i>, i. 379.<br/>

DOCKING, ii. 52.<br/>

DOCTOR, title of, i. 488, n. 3; ii. 373.<br/>

  See JOHNSON, doctor, and DR. MEMIS.<br/>

DOCTOR IN DIVINITY, respect shown to a, ii. 124.<br/>

DOCTORS' COMMONS, i. 134, 462, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Doctrine of Grace</i>, Warburton's, v. 93.<br/>

DODD, Rev. Dr. William, account of him, iii. 139;<br/>

  Allen's kindness to him, iii. 141;<br/>

  Boswell's anxiety for his pardon, iii. 119;<br/>

  canted all his life, iii. 270;<br/>

  character, iii. 122, 166;<br/>

  <i>currat lex</i>, iv. 207;<br/>

  dedication to Rev. Mr. Villette, iii. 167, n. 1;<br/>

  execution, iii. 120-1, 148;<br/>

  forgery, guilty of, iii. 140;<br/>

  Johnson, correspondence with, iii. 144-5, 147;<br/>

    describes, iii. 140, n. 2;<br/>

    writes for him <i>Convict's Address</i>, iii. 121, 141-2, 167, 295, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Last Solemn Declaration</i>, iii. 143;<br/>

  <i>Observations</i>, iii. 120, n. 4, 142;<br/>

  <i>Occasional Papers</i> (conclusion), iii. 148;<br/>

    petitions and letters, iii. 121, 142, 144;<br/>

    and his speech to the Recorder, iii. 126, 141;<br/>

  <i>Last Prayer</i>, iii. 270;<br/>

  life, longing for, iii. 154;<br/>

  Literary Club, tried to join the, iii. 280;<br/>

  Magdalen House, chaplain at, iii. 139, n. 4;<br/>

  mind concentrated, his, iii. 167;<br/>

  Newgate, closely watched in, iii. 166;<br/>

  petitions in his favour, ii. 90, n. 5; iii. 120, 143;<br/>

  saint, not to be made a, iv. 208;<br/>

  Sermons, his, iii. 248;<br/>

  <i>Thoughts in Prison</i>, iii. 270;<br/>

  'unfortunate,' iii. 120, n. 2;<br/>

  Wesley visits him in prison, iii. 121, n. 3;<br/>

  'wretched world, not a,' iii. 166;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 132.<br/>

DODD, Mrs., iii. 142.<br/>

DODDRIDGE, Dr., epigram by him, v. 271.<br/>

DODSLEY, James, i. 182; ii. 447.<br/>

DODSLEY, Robert, Cleans, acted, i. 324, n. 1, 325-6;<br/>

    compared by Johnson with Otway, iv. 21;<br/>

    'more blood than brains,' iv. 20;<br/>

  <i>Collection of Poems</i>, ii. 467; iii. 21, n. 1, 38, 149, n. 2, 269, 280;<br/>

iv. 24;<br/>

  'Dartineuf's' footman, ii. 447;<br/>

  'Doddy,' ii. 258, n. 1;<br/>

  Garrick, quarrel with, i. 325;<br/>

  Goldsmith, dispute on poetry with, iii. 38;<br/>

  imprisoned by the House of Lords, i. 125, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Irene</i>, publishes, i. 198;<br/>

  Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>, suggests, i. 182, 286; iii. 405;<br/>

    one of the publishers, i. 183, 264;<br/>

    asks to have the <i>Plan</i> inscribed to Chesterfield, i. 183;<br/>

    <i>London</i> published by him, i. 121-4;<br/>

    <i>Rasselas</i>, i. 341;<br/>

    <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>, i. 193, n. 1.<br/>

    'patron,' i. 326;<br/>

  <i>Life</i> should be written, his, ii. 446;<br/>

  <i>Muse in Livery</i>, ii. 446;<br/>

  Pope, assisted by, ii. 446, n. 4;<br/>

  Pope's executors, application to, iv. 51, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Preceptor</i>, i. 192;<br/>

  <i>Public Virtue</i>, iv. 20;<br/>

  wife's death, his, i. 277;<br/>

  <i>World, The</i>, i. 202, n. 4;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 135, n. 1, 243, 290, 317; ii. 453, n. 2; iv. 333, n. 1.<br/>

DODWELL, Henry, v. 437.<br/>

<i>Doggedly</i>, v. 40.<br/>

DOGGET, Thomas, ii. 465, n. 1.<br/>

DOGS attack butchers, ii. 232;<br/>

  eaten in China and Otaheite, ib.;<br/>

  have not power of comparing, ii. 96.<br/>

DOING NOTHING, v. 39.<br/>

<i>Dolus latet in universalibus</i>, v. 105.<br/>

<i>Domesticated</i>, i. 268, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Domina de North et Gray</i>, iv. 10.<br/>

DOMINICETTI, ii. 99.<br/>

DONALDSON, Alexander, Boswell's first publisher, i. 383, n. 3;<br/>

  intimacy with him, i. 439. n. 1;<br/>

  Copyright  case, i. 437-9; ii 345. n. 2.<br/>

DONATUS, ii. 204, n. 4, 358, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Don Belianis</i>, i. 49, n. 2.<br/>

DONCASTER, ii. 300, n. 5.<br/>

DONNE, Dr., saw a vision, ii. 445;<br/>

  uses the term <i>quotidian</i>, v. 346.<br/>

<i>Don Quixote</i>, wished longer, i. 71,   n. 1; ii. 238, n. 5;<br/>

  Don Quixote's death, ii. 370.<br/>

DOOR, 'author concealed behind the door,' i. 396.<br/>

<i>Dorando, A Spanish Tale</i>, ii. 50, n. 4.<br/>

DORSET, third Duke of, iv. 421, n. 2.<br/>

DOSA, ii. 7, n. 3.<br/>

DOSSIE, Robert, iv. 11.<br/>

DOUBLE LETTERS. See POST.<br/>

DOUGHTY, the engraver, ii. 286, n. 1; iv. 421, n. 2.<br/>

DOUGLAS, Archibald,<br/>

  (at first Archibald Stewart, at last Baron Douglas, of Douglas Castle),<br/>

ii. 50, n. 4, 230.<br/>

DOUGLAS, last Duke of, v. 43, n. 4.<br/>

DOUGLAS, Duchess of, v. 43, n. 4.<br/>

DOUGLAS, Sir James, journey to the Holy Land, iii. 177.<br/>

DOUGLAS, James, M.D., editions of Horace, iv. 279.<br/>

DOUGLAS, Lady Jane, ii. 50, n. 4, 230.<br/>

DOUGLAS, Rev. Dr. John, Bishop of Salisbury,<br/>

  British Coffee-house Club, a member of the, iv. 179, n. 1;<br/>

  Church of England, on the discipline of the, iv. 277;<br/>

  Cock Lane Ghost exposes the, i. 407;<br/>

  Goldsmith's lines on him, i. 229, n. 1, 407, n. 2; iii. 139, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Conduct of the Allies</i>, praises the, ii. 65;<br/>

  Hume, dines with, ii. 441, n. 5;<br/>

  Johnson's <i>London</i>, anecdote of, i. 127;<br/>

  Lauder's imposition, i. 228;<br/>

  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 140, 260, n. 3, 430; ii. 63, 125, n. 5.<br/>

DOUGLAS, SIR JOHN, iii. 163.<br/>

DOUGLAS, Lady Lucy, v. 359.<br/>

DOUGLAS CAUSE, account of it, ii. 50, 230;<br/>

  Boswell one of the counsel before House of Lords, iii. 8, 219;<br/>

v. 378, n. 2;<br/>

    and the Duchess of Argyle, v. 353, 359;<br/>

  <i>Essence of the Douglas Cause</i>, ii. 230, n. 1;<br/>

  Judges' windows broken, v. 353, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Letters to Lord Mansfield</i>, ii. 229;<br/>

  'shook the security of birth-right,' v. 28.<br/>

<i>Douglas</i>, a tragedy. SEE HOME, John.<br/>

DOVEDALE, v. 430.<br/>

DOVER, iv. 260, n. 1.<br/>

DOVER CLIFF, Shakespeare's description of, ii. 87.<br/>

<i>Downed</i>, iii. 335, n. 2.<br/>

DOXY, Miss, iii. 417-8.<br/>

<i>Drake, Life of</i>, i. 147, n. 5.<br/>

DRAMA, the English, characteristics of its dialogue, iv. 247.<br/>

DRAPER, the bookseller, iii. 46.<br/>

DRAUGHTS, game of, i. 317; ii. 444,<br/>

DRAYTON'S <i>Polyolbion</i>, v. 225, n. 3.<br/>

DREAMS, communication by them, i. 235;<br/>

  contest of wit in one, iv. 5;<br/>

  Prendergast's dream, ii. 183.<br/>

<i>Drelincourt on Death</i>, ii. 163.<br/>

DRESDEN, i. 266, n. 2.<br/>

DRESS, effects on the mind, i. 200; ii. 475;<br/>

  if fine, should be very fine, iv. 179; v. 364.<br/>

DRESSING, time spent in, v. 67.<br/>

DREWRY, SIR R., ii. 445, n. 4.<br/>

DRINKING, time it can go on, iii. 243, n. 4;<br/>

  in Johnson's youth, v. 59-60;<br/>

  rule about drinking to another, v. 356:<br/>

  SEE DRUNKENNESS and WINE.<br/>

<i>Drinking Song to Sleep</i>, i. 251.<br/>

DROGHEDA, fifth Earl of, iii. 30, n, 1.<br/>

DROMORE, Bishop of. SEE PERCY.<br/>

DROWNING, suicide by, v. 54.<br/>

DRUID'S TEMPLE, a, v. 107, 132.<br/>

DRUMGOLD, Colonel, ii. 397, 399, 401.<br/>

DRUMMOND, ALEXANDER, <i>Travels</i>, v. 323.<br/>

DRUMMOND, DR., iii. 88, 383.<br/>

DRUMMOND, GEORGE, v. 43.<br/>

DRUMMOND, WILLIAM, of Hawthornden, <i>Cypress Grove</i>, v. 180;<br/>

  <i>Polemomiddinia</i>, iii. 284;<br/>

  Jonson, Ben, visited by, v. 402, 414.<br/>

DRUMMOND, WILLIAM, bookseller of Edinburgh,<br/>

  account of him, ii. 26;<br/>

  Johnson's letters to him, ii. 27-31;<br/>

  Johnson, meets, v. 385, 394, 400;<br/>

  his son, iii. 88, n. 1.<br/>

DRUNKENNESS, as an art, iii, 389;<br/>

  'elevated,' v. 156, n. 2;<br/>

  its felicity, ii, 351; 435. n. 7; iii. 381, n. 3;<br/>

  on a little, iii. 170.<br/>

<i>Drury Lane Journal</i>, i. 218, n. 1.<br/>

DRURY LANE THEATRE, <i>Prologue on the opening of</i>, i. 181; iv. 25.<br/>

  SEE LONDON, Drury Lane.<br/>

DRYDEN, JOHN,<br/>

  <i>Absalom and Achitophel</i>, sale, i. 34, n. 5;<br/>

    quoted, ii. 348, n. 2; iv. 73, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>All for Love</i>, preface quoted, iv. 114, n 1;<br/>

  <i>Annus Mirabilis</i>, quoted, ii. 241, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Aurengsebe</i>, quoted, ii. 125; iv. 303, n. 3;<br/>

  Bayes in <i>The Rehearsal</i>, ii. 168:<br/>

  booksellers' mercantile ruggedness, suffered from the, i. 305, n. 1;<br/>

  borrows for want of leisure, v. 92, n. 4;<br/>

  Collier, censured by, i. 167, n. 2; iv. 286, n. 3;<br/>

  colleges  and kings, lines on, ii. 223;<br/>

  <i>Conquest of Granada</i>, quoted, iv. 259, n. 3;<br/>

    dedication, its, v. 239;<br/>

  converted to Roman Catholicism, iv. 44;<br/>

  dedications, studied conclusions to his, v. 239;<br/>

  'delighted to tread upon the brink of meaning,' ii. 241, n. l;<br/>

  <i>Life of</i>, Derrick's 'materials'; SEE DERRICK;<br/>

  dignity of his character, known to himself, i. 264, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Essay of Dramatick Poesie</i>, i. 197, n. 2; ii. 86, n. 1;<br/>

  'Fate after him,' &amp;c., iv. 25, n. 3;<br/>

  'familiar day,' his, iv. 91, n. 1;<br/>

  foreign words, on, i. 218, n. 1;<br/>

  genius, his conscious, iii. 405, n. 3;<br/>

  Hailes, Lord, anecdotes of him by, iii. 397, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Hind and Panther</i>, quoted, iv. 44;<br/>

  <i>Indian Emperour</i>, quoted, iii. 346, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson gathered materials for his <i>Life</i>, i. 456; iii. 71; iv. 44; v.<br/>

    240; writes it, iv. 44-6;<br/>

  Johnson, resemblance in his character to, iv. 45;<br/>

  judgment of the public, on the, i. 200, n. 2;<br/>

  Juvenal, dedication to his, iv. 38;<br/>

  Latin line wrongly attributed to him, iii. 304, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Life</i> not written by contemporaries, v. 415, n. 2;<br/>

  lines on life: SEE just above, <i>Aurengzebe</i>;<br/>

  love, fine lines on, ii. 85;<br/>

  Malone, <i>Life</i> by, iii. 397, n. 3;<br/>

  'mechanical defects,' on, iv. 247;<br/>

  <i>Metaphysical Poets</i>, mentions the, iv. 38;<br/>

  Milton, lines on, ii. 336; v. 86;<br/>

    Johnson's translation, <i>ib., n</i>. 1;<br/>

  <i>Ode on St. Cecilia's Day</i>, iii. 38;<br/>

  paid about sixpence a verse for 10,000 verses, i. 193, n. 1;<br/>

  pleasing a man against his will, on, iii. 69, n. 4;<br/>

  poets and monarchs, lines on, ii. 223;<br/>

  Pope, distinguished from, ii. 5, 85;<br/>

  predestination, puzzled about, iii. 347;<br/>

  prefaces, his, ii. 444, n. 1; iv. 114, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Prologue to the Tempest</i>, quoted, i. 361;<br/>

  prologues, his, ii. 325;<br/>

  rhyming tragedies, iv. 42, n. 7;<br/>

  <i>Rival Ladies</i>, quoted, iii. 296, n. 1;<br/>

  Royal  Society, lines on the, ii. 241;<br/>

  Settle, Elkanah, rivalry with, iii. 76;<br/>

  Shakespeare, admiration of, ii. 86, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>She Stoops to Conquer</i>, its title taken from him, ii. 205. n. 4;<br/>

  'shorn of his beams,' iii. 363, n. 1;<br/>

  style, distinguished by his, iii. 280;<br/>

  traded in corruption, i. 189, n. 1;<br/>

  Virgil, translation of, iii. 193;<br/>

  Will's Coffee-house, at, iii. 71;<br/>

  Zimri, character of, ii. 85.<br/>

  Du Bos, ii. 90.<br/>

DUCK, epitaph on a, i. 40.<br/>

DUCKET, George, i. 294, n. 9.<br/>

DUCKING-STOOL, iii. 287.<br/>

DUDLEY, Lord, v. 457.<br/>

DUDLEY, Sir Henry, (<i>alias</i> Rev. Henry Bate), iv. 296, n. 3.<br/>

DUEL, trial by, v. 24.<br/>

DUELLING,<br/>

  defended by Johnson and Oglethorpe, ii. 179;<br/>

    by Johnson as being as lawful as war, ii. 226;<br/>

      as self-defence, iv. 211;<br/>

    his serious opinion not given, ib., n. 4;<br/>

  could not explain its rationality, v. 230;<br/>

  Thomas, Colonel, killed in one, iv. 211, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Tom Jones</i>, the lieutenant in, ii. 180.<br/>

DUFFERIN, fifth Earl of, i. 358, n. 2.<br/>

DUGDALE, William, Sunday work in harvest, iii. 313, n. 3.<br/>

DU HALDE, <i>Description of China</i>, i. 136, 157; ii. 55; iv. 30.<br/>

DUKE, Richard, iv. 36, n. 4.<br/>

DUKE, an English one nothing, i. 409;<br/>

  weighed against a genius, i. 442.<br/>

DULL, fellow, a, ii. 126;<br/>

  magistrate, iv. 312.<br/>

<i>Dum vivimus, vivamus</i>, v. 271.<br/>

DUN, Rev. Mr., v. 381.<br/>

DUNBAR, Dr., Johnson introduces him to Boswell, iii. 436;<br/>

  described by Mackintosh and Colman, ib., n. 1; v. 92.<br/>

DUNCAN, Dr., ii. 354, n. 2.<br/>

DUNCES, ii. 84.<br/>

DUNCOMBE, William, iii. 314.<br/>

DUNDAS, Lord President, ii. 50, n. 4, 302, n. 2; iii. 213.<br/>

DUNDAS, Henry (Viscount Melville),<br/>

  account of him, ii. 160, n. 1;<br/>

  Boswell's malice against him, iii. 213, n. 1;<br/>

  George III, and a baronetcy for an apothecary, ii. 354, n. 2;<br/>

  government of India bill, iv. 213, n. 1;<br/>

  Knight, the negro, case of, iii. 213;<br/>

  Literary Property Case, i. 266;<br/>

  Palmer and Muir's case, iv. 125, n. 2;<br/>

  Robertson, a jaunt with, iii. 335, n. 1;<br/>

  Scotch accent, his, ii. 160; iii. 213;<br/>

  serfdom in Scotland, on, iii. 202, n. 1;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 191, n. 2.<br/>

DUNDEE, John, Viscount of, v. 58, n. 1.<br/>

'DUNGEON OF WIT,' v. 342.<br/>

DUNKIRK, iii. 326.<br/>

DUNMORE, fourth Earl of, v. 142, n. 2.<br/>

DUNNING, John (first Lord Ashburton),<br/>

  business, his way of getting through, iii. 128, n. 5;<br/>

  Devonshire accent, ii. 159;<br/>

  'great lawyer, the,' iii. 128;<br/>

  influence of the Crown, motion on the, iv. 220, n. 5;<br/>

  Johnson, willing to listen to, iii. 240;<br/>

  <i>Letter to Mr. Dunning on the English Particle</i>, iii. 254;<br/>

  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;<br/>

    elected, iii. 128;<br/>

  Loughborough, Lord, afraid of him, iii. 240, n. 3;<br/>

  Reynolds's dinner parties, describes, iii. 375, n. 2;<br/>

  Somerset's case, in, iii. 87, n. 3;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 437, n. 2.<br/>

DUNSINNAN, Lord. See NAIRNE, William.<br/>

DUNSTABLE, v. 428.<br/>

<i>Dunton's Life and Errors</i>, iv. 200.<br/>

<i>Dupin's History of the Church</i>, iv. 311.<br/>

DUPPA, Bishop, <i>Holy Rules</i>, iv. 402, n. 2.<br/>

DUPPA, R.,<br/>

  edits Johnson's <i>Journey into North Wales</i>, ii. 285, n. 2; v. 427, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Durandi Rationale Officiorum Divinorum</i>, ii. 397, n. 2; v. 459.<br/>

<i>Durandi Sanctuarium</i>, ii. 397.<br/>

<i>Durham on the Galatians</i>. v. 383.<br/>

DURHAM (City), iii. 297, n. 2, 457; v. 56, n. 2.<br/>

DURHAM (County), Militia Bill of 1756, i. 307, n. 4.<br/>

DURY, Lieutenant-Colonel, i. 338, n. 2.<br/>

DURY, Major-General, i. 338, n. 2.<br/>

DUTCH. See HOLLAND.<br/>

DYER, Sir James, i. 75.<br/>

DYER, John, <i>Fleece, The,</i> ii. 453;<br/>

  S. Dyer's portrait passed off as his, ib., n. 2.<br/>

DYER, Samuel, account of him, iv. 11, n. 1;<br/>

  Hawkins's character, draws, i. 28, n. 1;<br/>

  Hawkins slanders him, i. 480, n. 1;<br/>

  Ivy Lane Club, member of the, iv. 436;<br/>

  Johnson buys his portrait, iv. 11, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Junius,</i> suspected to be, iv. 11;<br/>

  Literary Club, member of the, i. 478, n. 2,479, 480, n. 2; ii. 17;<br/>

  held in high estimation, iv. 10-11;<br/>

  mathematician, a, v. 109;<br/>

  Reynolds's portrait of him, i. 363, n. 3; ii. 453, n. 2.<br/>

DYING. See DEATH.<br/>
</p>

<h3>E.</h3>

<p><i>Eagle and Robin Redbreast,</i> i. 117, n. 1.
EARLY HABITS, ii. 366.
EARLY RISING. See under BOSWELL, early rising, and JOHNSON, rising.
EARTHQUAKE, at Lisbon, i. 309, n. 3;
  in Staffordshire, iii. 136.
EAST INDIANS, barbarians, iii. 339.
EAST INDIES,
  Johnson receives a letter thence, iii. 20, 23;
    once thought of going there, iii. 20;
  quest of wealth, iii. 400;
  Scotch soldiers refuse to go there, v. 142, n. 2.
  See INDIA.
EASTER. See under JOHNSON.
EASTER to Whitsuntide, propitious to study, ii. 263.
EASTON MAUDIT, i. 486; iii. 437, 451.
EATING. See under JOHNSON.
ECCLES, Mr., an Irish gentleman, i. 423.
<i>Ecclesiastes,</i> iv. 300, n. 2.
ECCLESIASTICAL CENSURE, iii. 59, 91.
ECONOMY, anxious saving, ii. 131;
  art of—, iii. 265, 362;
  blundering—, iii. 300.
EDDYSTONE, i. 377.
EDENSOR INN, iii. 208.
EDIAL, i. 97; ii. 143.
<i>Edinburgh Magazine and Review,</i> iii. 334, n. 1.
_Edinburgh Review,
  _Campbell's <i>Diary of a Visit to England,</i> ii. 338, n. 2, 343, n. 2;
  payment to writers in it, iv. 214, n. 2.
<i>Edinburgh Review</i> of 1755, i. 298, n. 2.
<i>Edinburgh Royal Society Transactions,</i> iv. 25, n. 4.
EDITIONS OF A BOOK, iv. 279.
EDUCATION, by-roads, ii. 407;
  'Dick Wormwood' in <i>The Idler,</i> ii. 407, n. 5;
  fear, use of, i. 46; v. 99;
  influence  of it compared with nature, ii. 436;
  Johnson attacks and defends the 'common way,' ii. 407, n. 5;
    defends popular—, ii. 188; iii. 37;
    his plan, iii. 358, n. 2;
  Locke's plan, iii. 358;
  Mill, J. S., on the new system, ii. 146, n. 4;
  Milton's plan, iii. 358;
    'wonders' performed by him, ii. 407, n. 5;
  perfection attained in it, ii. 407;
  <i>refine,</i> not to, in it, iii. 169;
  Socrates's plan, iii. 358, n. 2; iv. 444;
  what should be taught first? i. 452.
  See BOOKS, KNOWLEDGE, LEARNING, SCHOOLS,
  and SCOTLAND, Education, Learning, and Schools.
EDWARD, Prince, brother of George III, iii. 139, n. 4.
EDWARDS, Rev. Dr., Johnson's letter to him, iii. 367;
  editing Xenophon, ib.;
  death, ib., n. 1.
EDWARDS, Jonathan, <i>On Grace</i>, iii. 290.
EDWARDS, Oliver,
  Johnson, meets, iii. 302-7; iv. 90;
    sends him <i>The Rambler</i>, ib;
  tried philosophy, iii. 305.
EDWARDS, Thomas, <i>Canons of Criticism</i>, i. 263, n. 3.
EDWIN, the comedian, iv. 381, n. 1.
EEL, iii. 381.
EGLINTOUNE, Alexander, tenth Earl of,
  calls Johnson a dancing-bear, ii. 66;
  his character, v. 374;
  death, iii. 188.
EGLINTOUNE, Archibald, eleventh Earl of, iii. 107, 214, 316; v. 149.
EGLINTOUNE, Countess of,
  Johnson visits her, v. 373-5;
    is adopted by her, iii. 366; v, 375, 401.
<i>Epilogues</i>, i. 277.
EGMONT, second Earl of, iv. 198, n. 3; v. 449, n. 1.
EGOTISM, iv. 323.
EGOTISTS, iii. 171.
EGYPT, iii. 233.
EGYPTIANS, ancient, iv. 125.
<i>Eighteen Hundred and Eleven</i>, ii. 408, n. 3.
ELD, Mr., iii. 326.
ELDON, Earl of. See SCOTT, John.
ELECTION, General, of 1768, ii. 60, n. 2;
  of 1774, ii. 285;
  of 1780, iii. 440;
  of 1784, iv. 165, n. 3.
ELECTION-COMMITTEES, iv. 74.
ELECTIONS,
  boroughs bought, ii. 153;
    by Nabobs, v. 106;
  lost by vice, iii. 350;
  rascals to be driven out of the county, ii. 167, 340.
<i>Elegy in a Country Churchyard</i>. See GRAY.
<i>Elements of Criticism</i>. See KAMES.
<i>Elements of Orthoepy</i>, iv. 389, n. 6.
<i>Elfrida</i>, ii. 335.
ELGIN, Earls of, v. 25, n. 2.
ELIBANK, Patrick, fifth Lord, account  of him, v. 386;
  Boswell, correspondence with, v. 14, 16, 181, 316;
  death, v. 181, n. 2;
  epitaph on his wife, iv. 10;
  Home, patronises,  v. 386;
  Johnson's definition of oats, i. 294, n. 8;
    and the great, iv. 117;
    letter to him, v. 182
    meets him in Edinburgh, v. 385-8, 393-4;
    visits him, v. 394;
    power of arguing, iii. 24;
    praises him, iii. 24; v. 182, 385;
    society, loves, v. 181-2;
  Robertson, patronises, v. 386;
    admires the moderation of, v. 393;
  talk, nothing conclusive in his, iii. 57;
  mentioned, ii. 140, 147, 187, 192, 275; v. 307.
ELIOT, Edward, of Port Eliot, first Lord Eliot, Chesterfield, Lord,
  praised by, iv. 334, n. 5;
  dines at Sir Joshua's, iv. 78, 332;
  Goldsmith, sarcasm on, ii. 265, n. 4;
  Harte, Dr., his tutor, iv. 78, 333;
  Johnson and the graces, iii. 54;
  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479; iv. 326;
  <i>latiner</i>, story of a, iv. 185, n. 1;
  <i>young</i> Lord, a, iv. 334.
ELIZA, epigram to. See MRS. CARTER.
ELIZABETH, Madame, ii. 394.
ELIZABETH, Queen, authors of her age, iii. 194, n. 2;
  fashion to exalt her reign, i. 354;
  had learning enough for a bishop, iv. 13.
ELLENBOROUGH, first Lord, iv. 414, n. 1.
ELLIOCK, Lord, iii. 213.
ELLIOT, Sir Gilbert, third Baronet, ii. 160.
ELLIOT, Sir Gilbert,
  fourth Baronet (afterwards first Earl of Minto), ii. 71, n. 1.
ELLIOT, Mr., i. 349.
ELLIOT,—, iii. 352, n. 2.
ELLIS, Sir Henry, i. 260, n. 2; v. 444, n. 2.
ELLIS, 'Jack,' a scrivener, iii. 21.
ELLIS, Welbore, ii. 337; n. 4.
ELLIS, Mr., ii. 116.
ELLSFIELD, i. 273, 289.
ELOCUTION, iv. 206.
ELPHINSTON, James, <i>Forty Years Correspondence</i>, ii. 305;
  Johnson, letters from: See JOHNSON, letters;
  <i>Martial</i>, translation of, iii. 258;
  manner, his, ii. 171; iii. 379;
  mother, loses his, i. 211;
  <i>Rambler</i>, brings out a Scotch edition of the, i. 210;
    translates the mottoes, i. 225;
  reading books through, on, ii. 226;
  school, his, ii. 171, 226;
  mentioned, ii. 30.
ELPHINSTONE, Bishop, v. 91.
ELRINGTON, Bishop, ii. 39, n. 1.
<i>Elvira</i>, i. 408.
ELWALL, E., ii. 164, 251.
ELWALLIANS, ii. 164.
ELWIN, Rev. W., Pope's <i>Universal Prayer</i>, iii. 346, n. 3.
<i>Embellishment</i>, iii. 209.
EMIGRATION, complaints of it, iii. 231;
  effects of it on population, iii. 232;
    on happiness, v. 27;
  caused by oppressive landlords, ib. n. 3;
  immersion in barbarism, v. 78. See SCOTLAND, Highlands, emigration.
EMINENT PUBLIC CHARACTER, an, ii. 222.
EMMET, Mrs., ii. 464.
EMPHASIS. See COMMANDMENT.
EMPLOYMENTS, their end is to produce amusement, ii, 234.
EMULATION, i. 46; v. 99.
ENGHIEN, Duke of, ii. 393, n. 7.
ENGLAND, air too pure for slaves to breathe in, iii. 87, n. 3;
  Condition (1780), 'difficulty very general,' iii. 420;
    (1782) seems to be sinking, iv. 139, n. 4;
    (1783) all things as bad as they can be, iv. 173;
  dreadful  confusion, iv. 249:
  times dismal and gloomy, iv. 260, n. 2;
  Corsica, treatment of, ii. 71, n. 1;
  common people, courage of the, iii. 262, n. 1;
  cruelty to black men, ii. 479;
  Englishman to a Frenchman, proportion of an, i. 186;
  felicity in its inns, ii. 451;
  genius and learning little respected, iv. 117, n. 1;
  government loan raised at 8 per cent. in 1779, iii. 408, n. 4;
  history of it scarcely credible, v. 340;
  knowledge of the common people, ii. 170, n. 3;
  language injured by foreign words, iii. 343, n. 3;
  literature: See LITERATURE;
  lost, found by the Scotch, iii. 78;
  loyal in general, ii. 370;
  poor, provision for the, ii. 130;
  reason and soil best cultivated, ii. 125;
  Reign of Terror, a kind of, iv. 328, n. 1;
  reserve, English, iv. 191, 284;
  roads, iii. 135, n. 1; v. 56, n. 2;
  slave trade, upholds the, ii. 480;
  stature of the people not lessened, ii. 217.
<i>England's Gazetteer</i>, iv. 311.
<i>English Humourists</i>, i. 199, n, 2.
<i>English Malady, The</i>, i. 65; iii. 27, n. 1.
<i>English Poets, Bell's</i>, ii. 453, n. 2.
ENGLISH PROSE. See STYLE
<i>Englishman in Paris</i>, ii. 395, n. 2.
ENTAILS, advantage of them, ii. 428;
  Barony of Auchinleck, ii. 413-423;
  Johnson's letters on it, ii. 415-423;
  limits should be set, ii. 428-9;
  nobles must be kept from poverty, ii. 421, n. 1; v. 101.
ENTHUSIASM, of curiosity, iii. 7;
  in farming, v. 111.
ENTHUSIAST, by rule, iv. 33.
<i>Enucleated</i>, iii. 346.
ENVY, all men naturally envious, iii. 271.
EPICHARMUS, ii. 107, n. 1.
EPICTETUS, v. 279.
EPICUREAN in <i>Lucian</i>, iii. 10.
EPIGRAM, judge of an, iii. 259.
EPISCOPACY, iii. 371; iv. 277. See BISHOPS and HIERARCHY.
<i>Epistle of St. Basil</i>, iv. 20.
EPITAPHS addressed to the passersby, iv. 85, n. 1; v. 367, n. 1;
  Latin for learned men, iii. 84, n. 2; v. 154, 366;
  man killed by a fall, on a, iv. 212;
  mixed languages or styles, iv. 444;
  the writer not upon oath, ii. 407; iii. 387, n. 5; iv. 443.
<i>Epitaphs, Essay on</i>, i. 148, 335; iv. 85, n. 1; v. 367, n. 1.
<i>Epocha</i>, iii. 128.
EPSOM, iii. 453.
EQUALITY OF MANKIND, would turn men into brutes, ii. 219;
  none happy in it, iii. 26;
  mercy abolished by it, iii. 204, n. 1;
  natural, ii. 13; n. 1, 479; iii. 202.
  See SUBORDINATION.
<i>Equitation</i>, v. 131.
ERASMUS, <i>Adagiorum Chiliades</i>, iv. 379, n. 2;
  <i>battologia</i>, v. 444;
  <i>Ciceronianus</i>, iv. 353;
  Dutch epitaph on him would be offensive, iii. 84, n. 2;
  epigram on him, v. 430;
  <i>Letter to the Nuns</i>, v. 446;
  _Militis Christiani Enchiridion, iii. 190, n. 3;
  <i>Manita Paedagogica</i>, quoted, i. 418, n. 2.
ERROL, Earls of, their property, v. 101, n. 4, 106, n. 1.
ERROL, thirteenth Earl of, account of him, v. 103;
  says grace with decency and sees the hand of Providence,  v. 104;
  his drinking, iii. 170, n. 2, 329; v. 104;
  educates a surgeon, v. 101;
  portrait by Reynolds, v. 102.
ERROL, Lady, v. 98-9, 105, 130.
ERROR, taking delight in, iv. 204.
ERSE. See IRELAND and SCOTLAND, Highlands, Erse.
ERSKINE, Hon. Andrew,
  _Correspondence with James Boswell, Esq., i. 383, n. 3; iii. 150, n. 4;
  <i>Critical Strictures</i>, i. 408;
  poet and critick, iii. 150.
ERSKINE, Lady Anne, v. 387.
ERSKINE, Hon. Archibald, v. 387.
ERSKINE, Sir Harry, i. 386.
ERSKINE, Hon. Henry, v. 39, n. 4.
ERSKINE, Hon. Thomas (afterwards Lord Erskine),
  account of him, ii. 173, n. 1;
  Johnson, meets, ii. 173-177;
  Richardson tedious, finds, ii. 174;
  sermons, preached two, ii. 176.
ERSKINE, Rev. Dr., v. 391.
ESAU'S BIRTHRIGHT, i. 255.
<i>Esdras</i>, ii. 189, n. 3.
ESQUIMAUX, ii. 247.
ESQUIRE, title of, i. 34; ii. 332, n. 1.
<i>Essay on Account of the Conduct of the Duchess of Marlborough</i>, i. 153.
<i>Essay on Architecture</i>, i. 306.
<i>Essay on Death</i>, ii. 107, n. 1.
<i>Essay of Dramatick Poesie</i>, i. 197, n. 2.
<i>Essay on Epitaphs. See</i> EPITAPHS.
<i>Essay on Milton's Use and Imitation of the Moderns in his Paradise
Lost</i>, i, 230.
<i>Essay on the Future Life of Brutes</i>, ii. 54, n. 1.
<i>Essay on the Origin of Evil. See</i> KING, Archbishop.
<i>Essay on Truth. See</i> BEATTIE, Dr.
<i>Essay on Wit, Humour, and Ridicule</i>, iv. 105, n. 4.
<i>Essays on the History of Mankind</i>, iii. 436, n. 1.
<i>Essays on Husbandry</i>, iv. 78, n. 3.
ESSEX, Club in one of the towns, i. 215;
  militia, i. 307, n. 4.
ESSEX, Arthur Capel, first Earl of, v. 403, n. 2.
ESSEX, Robert Devereux, second Earl of,
  advice about travelling, i. 431;
  <i>Queen Elizabeth's Champion</i>, written in his honour, v. 241.
ESTATE, residence on it a duty, iii. 177, 249;
  settling, supposed obligation in, ii. 432;
  succession in ancient estates, ii. 261;
    in those got by trade, ib.
ESTE, House of, i. 383.
ETERNAL PUNISHMENT, iii. 200.
ETERNITY, v. 154.
ETHICS, ii. 408, n. 3.
ETNA, strata of lava, ii. 468, n. 1.
ETON COLLEGE, Boswell places his son there, iii. 12;
  dines with the Fellows, v. 15, n. 5;
  boys cowed there, iii. 12, n. 1;
  line attributed to a boy, iii. 304;
  Macdonald, Sir James, a pupil, i. 449, n. 2; iv. 82, n. 1;
  Porson on Eton boys, i. 224, n. 1;
  Walpole, Horace, revisits it, iv. 127, n. 1;
  mentioned, i. 411; iv. 315; v. 97.
<i>Etymologicon Lingua; Anglicanae</i>, i. 186, n. 2.
<i>Etymologicum Anglicanum</i>, i. 186, n. 2.
ETYMOLOGIES. <i>See Dictionary</i>.
EUGENE, Prince, ii. 180.
<i>Eugenio,</i> i. 122; ii. 240.
EUMELIAN CLUB, iv. 394.
EUPHRANOR, iv. 104, n. 2.
EUPOLIS, iii. 267, n. 4.
EURIPIDES, Agamemnon in <i>Hecuba</i>, v. 79;
  armorial bearings, ii. 179;
  'every verse a precept, ii. 86, n. 1;
  fragments, iv. 181, n. 3;
  Barnes's edition, ib.;
  Johnson reads him, i. 70, 72; iv. 311;
  Markland's edition, iv. 161, n. 3;
  quoted, i. 277;
  mentioned, iv. 2.
<i>European Magazine,</i> i. 361, n. 2.
EUTROPIUS, ii. 237.
<i>Evangelical History Harmonized,</i> iv. 381, n. 1.
EVANS, Dr., epigram on Marlborough, ii. 451.
EVANS, Evan, addicted to strong drink, v. 443.
EVANS, John, i. 36, n. 2.
EVANS, Lewis, <i>Map, &amp;c., of the Middle Colonies</i>, i. 309.
EVANS, Thomas, bookseller, ii. 209.
EVANS, Mr., iii. 422.
<i>Evelina. See</i> Miss BURNEY.
<i>Evening Post,</i> iv. 140, n. 1.
EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT, iv. 299.
<i>Every island is a prison</i>, iii. 269; v. 256.
EVIL, origin of, v. 117, 366.
EVIL SPIRIT, personality of the, v. 36, n. 3.
EVIL SPIRITS, their agency, v. 45.
EXAGGERATION, causes of it, iii. 136;
  checked by arithmetic, iv. 171, n. 3;
  instances of it—depths of places filled up, v. 292;
  earthquake at Lisbon, i. 309, n. 3;
  editions of <i>Thomas à  Kempis</i>, iii. 226, n. 4;
  opera girls in France, iv. 171.
<i>Examen of Pope's Essay on Man</i>, i. 137.
<i>Examiner, The</i> (1873), iv. 202, n. 1.
EXCELLENCE, how acquired, iv. 184, n. 1.
EXCISE, Commissioners of, i. 294, n. 9.
EXCISE, defined, i. 294;
  origin of Johnson's violence against it, i. 36, n. 5.
<i>Excursion, The,</i> ii. 26.
EXECUTIONS, account of the capital convictions in 1783-5,
iv. 328, n. 1, 329, n. 2, 359, n. 2;
  Boswell's love of seeing them: See under BOSWELL;
  condemnation sermon at Oxford, i. 273;
  capital punishment, cruel instance of, i. 147, n. 1;
  Newgate, removed to, iv. 188;
  <i>Rambler</i>, mentioned in the, iv. 188, n. 3;
  Tyburn, procession to, iv. 188-9.
EXECUTORS, v. 106.
EXERCISE, defined, iv. 151, n. 1;
  relief for melancholy, i. 64, 446;
  renders death easy, iv. 150, n. 2.
EXETER, City and County, i. 36, n. 4;
  freedom given to Chief Justice Pratt, ii. 353, n. 2;
  George III visits it, iv. 165, n. 3;
  mentioned, iii. 457; iv. 77.
EXETER, Dr. Ross, Bishop of, iv. 273.
EXHIBITION. See ROYAL ACADEMY.
EXISTENCE, complaints of existence being imposed on man, iii. 53;
  terms on which it is offered, iii. 58. See LIFE.
EXPECTATIONS, i. 337, n. 1; iv. 234, n. 2.
EXPENDITURE. See ECONOMY.
EXPERIENCE, great test of truth, i. 454.
<i>Explanatory Notes on Paradise Lost</i>, i. 128, n. 2.
EXTRAORDINARY CHARACTERS, ii. 450.</p>

<h3>F.</h3>

<p><i>Fable of the Bees</i>, iii. 291, n. 4, 292, ns. 1, 2, and 3.<br/>

<i>Fable of the Glow-worm,</i> ii. 232.<br/>

FACTION, iv. 200.<br/>

FACTS, mingled with fiction, iv. 187.<br/>

<i>Faculty, The</i>, iii. 285, n. 2.<br/>

FAIRIES, iv. 17.<br/>

FADEN, W., i. 330, n. 3; iv. 440.<br/>

FAIRFAX, Edward, iv. 36, n. 4.<br/>

FAIRLIE, Mr., v. 380.<br/>

FAITH, merit in, iv. 123.<br/>

FALCONER, Rev. Mr., iii. 371.<br/>

FALCONER, Alexander, v. 103.<br/>

FALKLAND, Lord, iv. 428, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Falkland's Islands, Thoughts on the late Transactions respecting</i>,<br/>

  account of it, ii. 134;<br/>

  Johnson's estimate of it, ii. 147;<br/>

  'softened' in later copies, ii. 135;<br/>

  sale delayed by Lord North, ii. 136;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 373, n. 2; ii. 312; iii. 19, n. 2.<br/>

FALMOUTH, Viscount, iii. 331.<br/>

<i>False Alarm</i>, account of it, ii. 111;<br/>

  answers to it, ii. 112;<br/>

  election committees described, iv. 74, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson's estimate of it, ii. 147;<br/>

  petitions described, ii. 90, n. 5;<br/>

  rapidly written, i. 71, n. 3, 373, n. 2;<br/>

  Wilkes, answer attributed to, iv. 30;<br/>

  Wilkes attacked, iii. 64, n. 2; iv. 104.<br/>

FALSE CRIES, transmitted from book to book, iii. 55.<br/>

<i>False Delicacy</i>, ii. 48.<br/>

FALSEHOOD, due mostly to carelessness, iii. 228, 229, n. 1;<br/>

  prevalence of it, iii. 229.<br/>

FALSTAFF, Beauclerk adopts his 'humorous phrase,' i. 250;<br/>

  'I deny your Major,' iv. 316;<br/>

  proved no coward, iv. 192, n. 1;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 506.<br/>

FAME, general desire for it, iii. 263;<br/>

  literary, hard to get, ii. 358;<br/>

  a shuttlecock, v. 400;<br/>

  solicitude about it, i. 451.<br/>

FAMILIES, Great, chaplains and state servants, ii. 96;<br/>

  continuance of them, ii. 421;<br/>

  desire to propagate the name, ii. 469;<br/>

  estate, living on the, iii. 177, 249;<br/>

  founding one, ii. 429;<br/>

  household, number in the, iii. 316;<br/>

  preference shown them, ii. 153;<br/>

  ruined by extravagance, ii. 428.<br/>

  See under BOSWELL and JOHNSON, Birth.<br/>

FAMILY, affected by commerce, ii. 177.<br/>

FANCIES, apprehensions, fanciful, i. 470; iii. 4.<br/>

   See_ BOSWELL, Fancies.<br/>

FANCY, compared with reason, ii. 277.<br/>

<i>Fantoccini</i>, i. 414.<br/>

FARMER, Dr., Colman, criticised by, iv. 18;<br/>

  <i>Essay on the Learning of Shakspeare</i>, iii. 38;<br/>

  Johnson praises it, ib., n. 6;<br/>

    letters to him, i. 368; ii. 114; iii. 427;<br/>

  Percy, in his <i>Ancient Ballads</i>, helps, iii. 276, n. 2;<br/>

  Steevens, friendship with, iii. 281, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Tristram Shandy</i>, despises, ii. 449, n. 3;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 141.<br/>

FARMERS, worthless fellows, often, iii. 353;<br/>

  described by Wesley, ib., n. 5.<br/>

FARQUHAR, George, Johnson's opinion of his writings, iv. 7.<br/>

  <i>See Beaux Stratagem</i>.<br/>

<i>Fashionable Lover</i>, v. 176.<br/>

FASTING, examined medically, ii. 476-7;<br/>

  justified, ii. 352, n. 2;<br/>

  peevishness caused by it, ii. 435:<br/>

  See JOHNSON, fasting.<br/>

FAT MEN, iv. 213.<br/>

FATE. See FREE WILL.<br/>

FATHER, control over his daughters in marriage, iii. 377;<br/>

  not bound to tell of his children's faults, iii. 18.<br/>

<i>Father's Revenge, The</i>, iv. 246.<br/>

FAULDER, a bookseller, iv. 387, n. 1.<br/>

FAULKNER, G., Chesterfield's account of him, v. 44, n. 2;<br/>

  Ireland drained by England, v. 44;<br/>

  mimicked by Foote, ii. 154; v. 130;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 321.<br/>

FAWKENER, Sir Everard, i. 181, n. 1.<br/>

FAWKES, Rev. Francis, i. 382.<br/>

FAVOUR, granting a, ii. 167.<br/>

FAVOURITE defined, i. 295, n. 1.<br/>

FEAR, Charles V's saying, ii. 81;<br/>

  nothing left to fear when a man is bent on killing himself, ii. 229.<br/>

  See COURAGE.<br/>

FEELING FOR OTHERS. See SYMPATHY.<br/>

<i>Felixmarte of Hircania</i>, i. 49.<br/>

FELL, John, <i>Demoniacs</i>, v. 36, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Fellow</i>, ii. 362.<br/>

FENCING, v. 66.<br/>

FÉNELON, Archbishop, v. 175, n. 5, 311.<br/>

FENTON, Elijah, his advice to Gay, v. 60, n. 4;<br/>

  Mariamne, i. 102, n. 2;<br/>

  non-juror, a, ii. 321, n. 4.<br/>

FERGUSON, James, the self-taught philosopher, ii. 99; v. 149.<br/>

FERGUSON, James, a Scotch advocate, iii. 213, 214, n. 1.<br/>

FERGUSSON, Dr. Adam, account of him, v. 42;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 53, n. 1; v. 45.<br/>

FERGUSSON, Sir Adam, ii. 169.<br/>

FERMOR, Arabella, ii. 392, n. 8.<br/>

FERMOR, Mrs., the Abbess, ii. 392.<br/>

FERNE, Mr., v. 123-5.<br/>

FERNEY, i. 434; v. 14.<br/>

FERNS, Burke's pun on, iv. 73.<br/>

<i>Festivals and Fasts</i>, ii. 458.<br/>

FEUDAL ANTIQUITIES, ii. 202; iii. 414.<br/>

'FEUDAL GABBLE,' ii. 134, n. 4.<br/>

FEUDAL SYSTEM,<br/>

  Boswell for, and Johnson against it, ii. 177-8; v. 106;<br/>

  Johnson has the old feudal notions, iii. 177;<br/>

  male succession, origin of, ii. 417, 419;<br/>

  ridiculed by Smollett, v. 106, n. 3.<br/>

FICTION, small amount of real, iv. 236.<br/>

FIDDLERS, ii. 191.<br/>

FIDDLING, dangerous fascination, iii. 242;<br/>

  little thing, but not disgraceful, iii. 242;<br/>

  power of art shown in it, ii. 226.<br/>

FIELDING, Henry, alms-giving, on, ii. 119, n. 4, 212, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Amelia</i>, dedicated to Ralph Allen, v. 80, n. 5;<br/>

    Johnson reads it at a sitting, iii. 43:<br/>

      complains of the heroine's broken nose, ib., n. 2;<br/>

    Richardson could not read it, ii. 174, n. 1;<br/>

    'sad stuff,' iii. 43, n. 2;<br/>

    sale rapid, ib.;<br/>

    description of a <i>buck</i>, v. 184, n. 3;<br/>

    Westminster Round-house, i. 249, n. 2;<br/>

  attacks on authors, on, v. 275, n. 1;<br/>

  blockhead, a, ii. 173;<br/>

  barren rascal, a, ii. 174;<br/>

  Burney, Miss, admired by, ii. 174, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Champion, The</i>, i. 169, n. 2;<br/>

  died at Lisbon, iv. 260;<br/>

  foreigners, not understood by, ii. 49, n. 2;<br/>

  Gibbon's tribute to him, ii. 175, n. 2;<br/>

  hospitals, on, iii. 53, n. 5;<br/>

  Johnson praises him, ii. 173, n. 2:<br/>

  See above, <i>Amelia</i>, blockhead, and below, _Tom Jones;<br/>

  <i>Jonathan Wild</i>, compared with St. Austin, iv. 291;<br/>

    Hockley in the Hole, iii. 134, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Joseph Andrews</i>, never read by Johnson, ii. 174;<br/>

    Parson Adams, the original of, iii. 426, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Cato</i> and <i>The Conscious Lovers</i>, praised by Adams, i. 491, n. 3;<br/>

  Richardson, compared with, ii. 48, 174, ib., n. 2;<br/>

  Richardson's description of his heroes, ii. 49;<br/>

    of Fielding, ii. 174;<br/>

    of <i>Tom Jones</i>, ii. 175, n. 2;<br/>

  Robinhood Society described, iv. 92, n. 5;<br/>

  <i>Tom Jones</i>, Boswell praises it, ii. 175;<br/>

    Johnson despises it, ii. 174;<br/>

    More, Hannah, read by, ii. 174, n. 2;<br/>

    price paid for it, i. 287, n. 3;<br/>

    Allen the original of Allworthy, v. 80, n. 5;<br/>

    charity to the poor, ii. 212, n. 2;<br/>

    duelling, ii. 180, n. 1;<br/>

    Garrick and Partridge, v. 38;<br/>

    ghosts never speak first, v. 73, n. 3;<br/>

    soldiers, quartering of, iii. 9, n. 4;<br/>

    Squire Western on marriage, ii. 329, n. 2;<br/>

    transpire, iii. 343, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Voyage to Lisbon</i>, i. 269, n. 1;<br/>

  Ward, the quack-doctor, praises, iii. 389, n. 5;<br/>

  Welch, Saunders, succeeded by, iii. 216;<br/>

  Westminster Justice, salary as a, iii. 217, n. 2.<br/>

FIELDING, Sir John, Boswell applies to him, i. 422;<br/>

  his house pulled down in the Gordon Riots, iii. 428.<br/>

FIELDING, Miss, compared with her brother, ii. 49, n. 2.<br/>

FIELDING, ——, a bookseller, iv. 421, n. 2.<br/>

FIFE, Earl, v. 109.<br/>

FIGHTING-COCK, ii. 334.<br/>

FIGURATIVE EXPRESSIONS, in prayers, iv. 294.<br/>

FILBY, John, ii. 83.<br/>

FINE AND RECOVERY, ii. 429, n. 1.<br/>

FINE CLOTHES, iv. 179; v. 364.<br/>

FINES, iii. 323.<br/>

<i>Fingal</i>. See MACPHERSON, James.<br/>

<i>Finnick Dictionary</i>, i. 276, 278-9.<br/>

FIRE, going round the, i. 60, n. 4;<br/>

  superstitious tricks to make it burn, iii. 404.<br/>

FIREBRACE, Lady, i. 136.<br/>

FIRST CAUSE, iii. 316.<br/>

FISHER, Dr., ii. 268, n. 2, 445, n. 1.<br/>

FISHER, Kitty, v. 185, n. 1.<br/>

FISHMONGER, story of a, iii. 381.<br/>

FITZ-ADAM, Adam (Edward Moore), i. 257, n. 3.<br/>

FITZHERBERT, Alleyne (Lord St. Helen's), i. 82.<br/>

FITZHERBERT, Mrs., i. 82-3; iv. 33.<br/>

FITZHERBERT, William,<br/>

  affected man, dealing with an, iii. 149;<br/>

  Baretti's trial, at, ii. 97, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>bon mot</i>, on carrying a, ii. 350;<br/>

  character, his, drawn by Johnson, iii. 148;<br/>

    and by Burke, ib., n. l;<br/>

  felicity of manner, iii. 386;<br/>

  Foote's small beer, anecdote of, iii. 69-70;<br/>

  friend, had no, ii. 228; iii. 149;<br/>

  hanged himself, ii. 228, n. 3; iii. 149, n. 1, 384, n. 4;<br/>

  Johnson in Inner Temple-lane, describes, i. 350, n. 3;<br/>

    defends in parliament, iv. 318, n. 3;<br/>

    makes a present of wine to, i. 305, n. 2;<br/>

  parliament, elected to, i. 363;<br/>

  Townshend's, Charles, jokes, ii. 222;<br/>

  tragedy, anecdote of a, iii. 239;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 82; iv. 28, 33.<br/>

FITZMAURICE, Thomas, ii. 282, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Fitzosborne's Letters</i>, iii. 424; iv. 272, n. 4.<br/>

FITZPATRICK, Richard, iii. 388, n. 3.<br/>

FITZROY, Lord Charles, ii. 467.<br/>

FITZWILLIAM, Lord, iv. 367, n. 3.<br/>

FLAGEOLET, iii. 242.<br/>

FLATMAN, Thomas, iii. 29.<br/>

FLATTERY, flattered by him whom every one else flatters, ii. 227;<br/>

  pleases generally, ii. 364;<br/>

  stage, on the, ii. 234.<br/>

FLEA and a lion, ii. 194;<br/>

  precedency between a flea and a louse, iv. 193.<br/>

<i>Fleece, The</i>, ii. 453.<br/>

FLEETWOOD, Bishop, v. 294, n. 2.<br/>

FLEETWOOD, Charles, patentee of Drury-lane theatre, i. 111, 153.<br/>

FLEETWOOD, Everard, iii. 323, n. 3.<br/>

FLEMING, Lady, i. 461, n. 5.<br/>

FLEXMAN, Rev. Mr., iv. 325.<br/>

FLEXNEY, the bookseller, ii. 113, n. 2.<br/>

FLINT, Bet, iv. 103.<br/>

FLINT, Professor, v. 64.<br/>

FLINT,—, v. 430.<br/>

FLODDEN FIELD, ii. 413; v. 379.<br/>

FLOGGING, less than of old, ii. 407.<br/>

  See ROD.<br/>

FLOOD, Right Hon. Henry,<br/>

  Johnson's <i>Debates</i>, on, i. 321, n. 5, 506; ii. 139;<br/>

    sepulchral verses on, iv. 424.<br/>

FLORENCE, Johnson wishes to visit it, iii. 19<br/>

  statue of a boar, iii. 231;<br/>

  wine, iii. 381.<br/>

FLOYD, Thomas, i. 457.<br/>

FLOYER, Sir John, M.D., advises the 'regal touch,' i. 42;<br/>

  asthma, book on, iv. 353;<br/>

  corrupted the register, iv. 267;<br/>

  <i>Touchstone of Medicines</i>, i. 36, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Treatise on Cold Baths</i>, i. 91.<br/>

FLUDYER, Rev. John, ii. 444.<br/>

FLYING MAN, iv. 357, n. 3.<br/>

FOLIOS, i. 428, n. 1.<br/>

FONDNESS, distinguished from kindness, iv. 154.<br/>

FONTAINEBLEAU, ii. 385, 394.<br/>

FONTANERIUS, Paulus Pelissonius (Pelisson), i. 90, n. 1.<br/>

FONTENELLE, 'Fontenellus, ni falior,' &amp;c., ii. 125, n, 5;<br/>

  Mémoires, iii. 247;<br/>

  Newton, on, ii. 74, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Panegyrick on Dr. Morin</i>, i. 150.<br/>

FONTENOY, Battle of, i. 355; iii. 8, n. 3.<br/>

FOOD, production of, ii. 102.<br/>

<i>Fool, The</i>, ii. 33.<br/>

FOOLS, Latin needful to a fool's completeness, i. 73, n. 3;<br/>

  'let us be grave, here comes a fool,' i. 4;<br/>

  spaniel and mule fools, v. 226.<br/>

FOOTE, Samuel, Baretti's trial, ii. 94;<br/>

  Bedlam, visits, ii. 374;<br/>

  'black broth,' ii. 215;<br/>

  Burke, compared with, iv. 276;<br/>

  Chesterfield, satire on, iv. 333;<br/>

  conversation between wit and buffoonery, ii. 155;<br/>

  <i>Cozeners, The</i>, iv. 333, n. 3;<br/>

  death, fear of, ii. 106;<br/>

  death, his, iii. 185, n. 1, 387, n. 4, 453;<br/>

  Edinburgh, at, ii. 95, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Englishman in Paris</i>, ii. 395, n. 2;<br/>

  'Foote, <i>quatenus</i> Foote superior to all,' iii. 185<br/>

  <i>Footeana</i>, iii. 185, n. 1;<br/>

  Garrick's bust, iv. 224;<br/>

    and the ghost of a halfpenny, iii. 264;<br/>

    compared with, iii. 69, 183; v. 391;<br/>

  George III at the Haymarket, iv. 13, n. 3;<br/>

  Haymarket theatre, gets a patent for, iii. 97, n. 2;<br/>

  'Hesiod' Cooke introduces him, v. 37;<br/>

  humour not comedy but farce, ii. 95;<br/>

  impartiality in lying, ii. 434;<br/>

  incompressible, v. 391;<br/>

  infidel, an, ii. 95;<br/>

  Johnson and the French players, ii. 404;<br/>

    intended to exhibit, ii. 95, 155, n. 2, 299;<br/>

    in Paris, ii. 398, 403;<br/>

    pleased against his will, iii. 69;<br/>

    regret for his death, iii. 185, n. 1, 374, n. 4;<br/>

    witticism, fathered on him, ii. 410, n. 1;<br/>

  knowledge and reading, his, iii. 69;<br/>

  Law-Lord, on a dull, iv. 178;<br/>

  leg, loses a, ii. 95, n. 1, 155, n. 1; iii. 97, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>depeditation</i>, v. 130;<br/>

  <i>Life</i> of him, by W. Cooke, iv. 437;<br/>

  Macdonald, Sir A., should ridicule, v. 277;<br/>

  making fools of his company, ii. 98;<br/>

  mimic, not a good, ii. 154; iii. 69;<br/>

  'Monboddo, an Elzevir Johnson,' ii. 189 n. 2; v. 74, n. 3;<br/>

  Murphy and <i>The Rambler</i>, i. 356;<br/>

  Murphy's account of a dinner at his house, i. 504;<br/>

  <i>Nabob, The</i>, iii. 23, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Orators, The</i>, ii. 154, n. 3; v. 130, n. 2;<br/>

  patent, sells his, iii. 97;<br/>

  <i>Piety in Pattens</i>, ii. 48, n. 2;<br/>

  rising in the world, ii. 155, n. 2;<br/>

  small-beer and the black boy, iii. 70;<br/>

  stories, his, dismissed from the mind, ii. 433, n. 2;<br/>

  Townshend, Charles, surpassed by, ii. 222, n. 3;<br/>

  wit of escape, has the, iii. 69;<br/>

  wit under no restraint, iii. 69;<br/>

  Worcester College, Oxford, at, ii. 95, n. 2;<br/>

  wicked pleasure in circulating an anecdote, i. 453.<br/>

FOPPERY never cured, ii. 128.<br/>

FORBES, Bishop, v. 252.<br/>

FORBES, Rev. Mr., v. 75.<br/>

FORBES, Sir William, and Co., v. 253.<br/>

FORBES, Sir William, of Pitsligo, sixth Baronet,<br/>

  <i>Beattie, Life of</i>, v. 25, n. 1, 273, n. 4;<br/>

  Boswell's eulogium on him, v. 24, 413, n. 3;<br/>

    executor, iii. 301, n. 1;<br/>

    children, guardian to, iii. 400, n. 1;<br/>

    journals, reads, iii. 208; v. 413;<br/>

    letter to, v. 413;<br/>

  Carre's <i>Sermons</i>, edits, v. 28;<br/>

  Errol, Lord, account of, v. 103, n. 1;<br/>

  honest lawyers, on the duty of, v. 26-7, 72;<br/>

  Johnson at Garrick's funeral, iii. 371, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Round Robin</i>, account of the, iii. 82-5;<br/>

  Scott's tribute to him, v. 25, n. 1;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 41, 42, 221; v. 32, 44, 46, 393.<br/>

FORBES, Sir William, seventh baronet, v. 253, n. 3.<br/>

FORD, Cornelius (Johnson's uncle), i. 49.<br/>

FORD, Rev. Cornelius (Johnson's cousin),<br/>

  Hogarth's 'Parson Ford,' i. 49; iii. 348;<br/>

  Johnson's account of him, ib.;<br/>

  his ghost, iii. 349.<br/>

FORD, Dr. Joseph, i. 49, n. 3.<br/>

FORD FAMILY, i. 34; pedigree, i. 49, n. 3.<br/>

FORDYCE, Dr. George, member of the Literary Club, i. 479; ii. 274, 318;<br/>

iii. 230, n. 5; iv. 326;<br/>

  anecdote of his drinking, ii. 274, n. 6.<br/>

FORDYCE, Rev. Dr. James, i. 396; iv. 411.<br/>

<i>Foreign History in Gent. Mag</i>. i. 154.<br/>

FOREIGNER, an eminent, iv. 14.<br/>

FOREIGNERS, 'are fools,' i. 82, n. 3; iv. 15;<br/>

  writing a book in England, ii. 221;<br/>

  attaching themselves to a party, ib.:<br/>

  see JOHNSON, Foreigners.<br/>

<i>Forenoon</i>, changed into <i>morning</i>, ii. 283, n. 3.<br/>

FORGETFULNESS, iv. 126.<br/>

<i>Form</i>, iv. 321.<br/>

<i>Former, the, the latter</i>, iv. 190.<br/>

FORMOSA, iii. 443; v. 209.<br/>

<i>Formosa, Historical and Geographical Description of</i>, iii. 444.<br/>

FORMS, tenacity of, iv. 104.<br/>

<i>Formular</i>, ii. 234.<br/>

FORNICATION, heinous sin, not a, ii. 172;<br/>

  misery caused by it, i. 457;<br/>

  penance for it, v. 208;<br/>

  probationer, cause of a, ii. 171;<br/>

  a sectary guilty of it, ii. 472;<br/>

  should be punished by law, iii. 17, 407.<br/>

FORRESTER, Colonel, iii. 22.<br/>

FORSTER, George, <i>Voyage to the South Sea</i>, iii. 180.<br/>

FORSTER, John, Bickerstaff, I., ii. 82, n. 3;<br/>

  Boswell's stories, on variations of, i. 445, n. 1;<br/>

  Bute's pensioners, i. 373, n. 1;<br/>

  Churchill's <i>Rosciad</i>, i. 419, n. 5;<br/>

  Davies and 'Goldy,' ii. 258, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Drelincourt on Death</i>, ii. 163, n. 4;<br/>

  George III's pensioners, ii. 112, n. 3;<br/>

  Goldsmith's assault on Evans, ii. 209, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Good-Natured Man</i>, ii. 48, n. 2;<br/>

    quarrel with Johnson, ii. 253, n. 4,<br/>

  <i>She Stoops to Conquer</i>, and the Royal Marriage Act, ii. 224, n. 1;<br/>

    its production on the stage, ii. 208, n. 5;<br/>

    its title, ii. 205, n. 4;<br/>

    and Sterne, ii. 173, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Traveller</i>, the first line in, iii. 253, n. 1;<br/>

  inaccuracy about 'Hesiod' Cooke, v. 37, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson's letter to Goldsmith, ii. 235, n. 2;<br/>

    and the Prince of Wales, iv. 270, n. 2;<br/>

  Moore, Edward, mistakes for Dr. John Moore, iii. 424, n. 1;<br/>

  taste, changes in public, iii. 192, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Fort</i>, a pun on it, ii. 241, n. 3.<br/>

FORTITUDE, iv. 374, n. 5.<br/>

<i>Fortune, a Rhapsody</i>, i. 124.<br/>

FORTUNE, wasting a, iii. 317.<br/>

FORTUNE-HUNTERS, ii. 131.<br/>

FORWARDNESS, ii. 449.<br/>

FOSSANE, ii. 400, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Fossilist</i>, ii. 304, n. 1; v. 408, n. 1.<br/>

FOSTER, Dr. James, iv. 9.<br/>

FOSTER, John, head-master of Eton, iv. 8, n. 3.<br/>

FOSTER, Mrs., i. 227.<br/>

  See MILTON, granddaughter.<br/>

FOTHERGILL, Rev. Dr. ii. 331, 333.<br/>

FOULIS, Sir James, v. 150, 242.<br/>

FOULIS, Messrs., Glasgow booksellers, ii. 380;<br/>

  'Elzevirs of Glasgow,' v. 370.<br/>

<i>Foundling Hospital for Wit</i>, iv. 289, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Fountains, The</i>, ii. 26, 232.<br/>

FOWKE, Mr., iii. 71, n. 5; iv. 34, n. 5.<br/>

FOWLER, Mr., ii. 63.<br/>

FOX, Charles James, Boswell on the India Bill, iv. 258, n. 2;<br/>

  Burnet's style, ii. 213, n. 2;<br/>

  Charles II, descended from, iv. 292, n. 2;<br/>

  'commenced patriot,' iv. 87, n. 2;<br/>

  Covent Garden mob, iv. 279, n. 2;<br/>

  described by Lord Holland, Gibbon, Mackintosh,<br/>

and Rogers, iv. 167, n. 1;<br/>

  Walpole and Hannah More, iv. 292, n. 3;<br/>

  Fitzpatrick's 'sworn brother,' iii. 388, n. 3;<br/>

  George III's competitor, iv. 279;<br/>

  divides the kingdom with Caesar, 292;<br/>

  George III his own minister, i. 424, n. 1;<br/>

  Goldsmith's <i>Traveller</i>, praises, iii. 252, 261;<br/>

  Homer, reads, iv. 218, n. 3;<br/>

  India Bill, i. 311, n. 1; iii. 224, n. 1; iv. 258, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's epitaph, iv. 443;<br/>

    'friend,' iv. 292;<br/>

    for the King against Fox, but for Fox against Pitt, iv. 292;<br/>

    in parliament, defends, iv. 318, n. 3;<br/>

    presence, silent in, iii. 267; iv. 166;<br/>

    thinks highly of his abilities, iii. 267;<br/>

    accounts for his silence in company, iv. 167;<br/>

  Kirkwall, returned for, iv. 266, n. 2;<br/>

  Libel Bill, iii. 16, n. 1;<br/>

  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479, 481, n. 3; ii. 274,<br/>

318; iii. 128, n. 4;<br/>

  Lyttelton, second Lord, character of the, iv. 298, n. 3;<br/>

  Palmer and Muir's case, iv. 125, n. 2;<br/>

  Pitt's pertness, iv. 297, n. 2;<br/>

  poetry <i>truth</i>, not history, ii. 366, n. 1;<br/>

  Reynolds too much under him, iii. 261;<br/>

  Sandwich's, Lord, removal, motion for, iii. 383, n. 3;<br/>

  subscription to the Articles, ii. 150, n. 7;<br/>

  <i>Sydney Biddulph</i>, praises, i. 390, n. 1;<br/>

  Treasury, dismissal from the, ii. 274, n. 7;<br/>

  Westminster election, iv. 266, 292, n. 3.<br/>

FOX, Henry. See HOLLAND, First Lord.<br/>

FOX, Lady Susan, ii. 328, n. 3.<br/>
</p>

<p>FOX, Mrs., iv. 279, n. 2.<br/>

FOX-(Faux, or Vaux) HALL, iv. 26, n. 1.<br/>

FOX-HUNTING, i. 446, n. 1.<br/>

FRA PAOLO. See SARPI.<br/>

FRANCE AND THE FRENCH,<br/>

  Academy takes forty years to compile their <i>Dictionary</i>,<br/>

i. 186, 301, n. 2;<br/>

    sends Johnson a copy, i. 298;<br/>

  on the resistance of the air, v. 253;<br/>

  affectation of philosophy and free-thinking, iii. 388, n. 3;<br/>

  Americans, assistance to the, iv. 21;<br/>

  <i>Ana</i>, their, v. 311;<br/>

  anglomania, ii. 126;<br/>

  Assembly, iv. 434;<br/>

  authors and their pensions, i. 372, n. 1;<br/>

  authors superficial, i. 454;<br/>

  commercial policy, masters of the world in, iii. 232, n. 1;<br/>

  commercial treaty, v. 232, n. 1;<br/>

  contented race, v. 106, n. 4;<br/>

  cookery, ii. 385, 403;<br/>

  Corsica, government of, ii. 71, n. 1;<br/>

  credulity, v. 330;<br/>

  crossroads, ii. 391;<br/>

  difference between English and French, iv. 14;<br/>

  England, contrasted with, i. 227, n. 4;<br/>

  English language injured by Gallicisms, iii. 343;<br/>

  'fluency and ignorance,' iv. 15, n. 4;<br/>

  invasion feared, iii. 326, 360, n. 3, 365, n. 4;<br/>

  'French maxims abolish mercy,' iii. 204, n. 1.<br/>

  Garrick's account of their sameness, iv. 15, n. 3;<br/>

  gay people, not a, ii. 402, n. 1;<br/>

  great people live magnificently, ii. 402;<br/>

  houses gloomy, ii. 388, n. 2;<br/>

  hunting, v. 253;<br/>

  Irish, contrasted with the, ii. 402, n. 1;<br/>

  Jersey, attack on, v. 142, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's tour, ii. 384-404;<br/>

    <i>Journal</i>, ii. 389-401;<br/>

      account given by him to Boswell, 401;<br/>

    made more satisfied with England, iii. 352;<br/>

    saw little of French society, ii. 385, 401, 403, n. 4;<br/>

  Lewis XIV, under, ii. 170;<br/>

  literati, v. 229;<br/>

  literature, art of accommodating, v, 310;<br/>

    book on every subject, iv. 237;<br/>

    high in every department, ii. 125;<br/>

    little original, v. 311;<br/>

    not so general as in England, iii. 254;<br/>

    in its second spring, ib.;<br/>

  literary society described by Gibbon and Walpole, iii. 254, n. 1;<br/>

  magistrates and soldiers, ii. 391, 395;<br/>

  manners<br/>

    indelicate, ii. 403;<br/>

    gross, iii. 352;<br/>

    habit of spitting, ii. 403; iii. 352; iv. 237;<br/>

  meals gross, ii. 389;<br/>

  meat, fit for a gaol, ii. 402, 403;<br/>

    described by Smollett as good, ii. 402, n. 2;<br/>

      by Goldsmith as bad, ib.;<br/>

  men know no more than the women, iii. 253;<br/>

  middle rank, no, ii. 394, 402;<br/>

  military character respected, iii. 10;<br/>

  mode of life not pleasant, ii. 388;<br/>

  national petulance, ii. 126;<br/>

  novels, ii. 125;<br/>

  opera girls, iv. 171;<br/>

  Paris: See PARIS; peace of 1762, i. 382, n. 1;<br/>

    of 1782-3, iv. 282, n. 1;<br/>

  people, misery of the, ii. 402;<br/>

  philosophy, pursuit of, iii. 305, n. 2;<br/>

  players, ii. 404;<br/>

  politeness, iv. 237;<br/>

  poor laws, no, ii. 390;<br/>

  prisoners in England, i. 353;<br/>

  private life unaffected by despotic power, ii. 170;<br/>

  privileges little abused, v. 106, n. 4;<br/>

  Provence, gaiety of, ii. 402, n. 1;<br/>

  Scotland, compared with, ii. 403;<br/>

  sentiments, ii. 385, n. 5;<br/>

  soldiers and a woman, story of some, ii,<br/>

  391;<br/>

  stage, delicacy of the, ii. 50, n. 3;<br/>

  subordination, happy in, v. 106;<br/>

  talking, must be always, iv, 15;<br/>

  tavern life in no perfection, ii. 451;<br/>

  torture, use of, i. 467, n. 1;<br/>

  treatment of Indians, i. 308, n. 2;<br/>

  trees along a road, ii. 395;<br/>

  words, use big, i. 471:<br/>

  See under ROUSSEAU, SMOLLETT, MRS. THRALE, H. WALPOLE.<br/>

FRANCE, Queen of, flattered, iii. 322.<br/>

FRANCIS, Rev. Dr. Philip, praises Johnson's <i>Debates</i>, i. 504;<br/>

  translates Horace, iii. 356.<br/>

FRANCIS, Sir Philip, censures Burke's style, iii. 187, n. 1.<br/>

Francklin, Rev. Dr. Thomas, Johnson, inscribes his <i>Lucian</i> to, iv. 34;<br/>

  Murphy, attacks, i. 355;<br/>

  <i>Rosciad</i>, in the, iv. 34, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Round Robin</i>, did not sign the, iii. 83, n. 3.<br/>

FRANCK, Johnson's servant. See BARBER.<br/>

FRANCK, post office, ii. 266; iv. 361, n. 3.<br/>

FRANCKLAND, Sir Thomas, iv. 235, n. 5.<br/>

FRANKLIN, Dr. Benjamin, books bought in his youth, iv. 257, n. 2;<br/>

  books, high price of English, i. 438, n. 2;<br/>

  Boswell, dines with, ii. 59;<br/>

  civil liberty compared with liberty of trading, ii. 60, n. 4;<br/>

  conversion from vegetarianism, iii. 228, n. 1;<br/>

  England, hypocrisy of, ii. 480;<br/>

  Georgia, settlement of, i. 127, n. 4;<br/>

  good that one man can do, iv. 97, n. 3;<br/>

  Hollis, Thomas, iv. 97, n. 3;<br/>

  human felicity how produced, i. 433, n. 4;<br/>

  inoculation, iv. 293, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's pension and W. Strahan, ii. 137, n. 1;<br/>

  Lee, Arthur, iii. 68, n. 3;<br/>

  life, wished to repeat his, iv. 302, n. 1;<br/>

  Loudoun, Lord, v. 372, n. 3;<br/>

  man, definition of, iii. 245; v. 32, n. 3;<br/>

  Mansfield's, Lord, house burnt, iii. 429, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Old Man's Wish</i>, iv. 19, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>pamphlets</i>, iii. 319, n. 1;<br/>

  Paris Foundling Hospital, ii. 398, n. 5;<br/>

  population, rule of increase  of, ii. 314;<br/>

  Priestly and Price, iv. 434;<br/>

  Pringle, Sir John, iii. 65, n. 1;<br/>

  Quakers of Philadelphia, iv. 212, n. 1;<br/>

  Ralph, James, i. 169, n. 2;<br/>

  riots in London in 1768, ii. 60, n. 2; iii. 46, n. 5;<br/>

  rise of himself and Strahan, ii. 226, n. 2;<br/>

  Shipley, Bishop, friendship with, iv. 246, n. 4;<br/>

  Wilcox, the bookseller, i. 102, n. 2;<br/>

  Strahan, letter to, iii. 364, n. 1;<br/>

  Whitefield's oratory, ii. 79, n. 4;<br/>

  'Wilkes and liberty,' ii. 60, n. 2.<br/>

FRANKLIN, Thomas, iii. 83. n. 3.<br/>

FRASER, Dr., v. 108.<br/>

FRASER, General, iii. 2.<br/>

FRASER, Mr., of Balnain, v. 133.<br/>

FRASER, Mr., the engineer, iii. 326.<br/>

FRASER, Mr., of Strichen, v. 107.<br/>

FRAUDS, none innocent, ii. 434, n. 2.<br/>

FREDERICK, Prince of Wales. See under PRINCE OF WALES.<br/>

FREDERICK THE GREAT,<br/>

  difficulties of his youth, i. 442, n. 1;<br/>

  dressed plainly, ii. 475;<br/>

  George II, quarrel with, iv. 107;<br/>

  Johnson <i>downs</i> Robertson with him, iii. 334-5;<br/>

    opinion of his poetry, i. 434;<br/>

    writes his <i>Memoirs</i>, i. 308;<br/>

  Maupertuis, lines to, ii. 54, n. 3;<br/>

  overawes Hanover, v. 201, n. 4;<br/>

  power as a despotic prince, ii. 158;<br/>

  prose and poetry, i. 434-5;<br/>

  social, i. 442;<br/>

  taken by the nose, risk of being, ii. 229;<br/>

  torture, forbade use of, i. 467, n. 1;<br/>

  Voltaire, contends with, i. 434; v. 103, n. 2.<br/>

FREDERICK-WILLIAM the First, i. 308.<br/>

FREE AGENT, iv. 123.<br/>

FREE WILL,<br/>

  Boswell introduces discussion, ii. 82, 104; iii. 290;<br/>

  consults Johnson by letter, iv. 71;<br/>

  'we know our will is free,' ii. 82; iv. 329;<br/>

  'all theory against it,' iii. 291;<br/>

  best for mankind, v. 117.<br/>

<i>Freeholder</i>, ii. 61, n. 4; 319, n. 1.<br/>

FREEPORT, Sir Andrew, ii. 212.<br/>

FREIND, Dr., i. 177, n. 2.<br/>

FRENCH, Mrs., iv. 48.<br/>

FRENCH COOK, a nobleman's, i. 469.<br/>

FRERON, father and son, ii. 392, 406.<br/>

FRESCATI, v. 153, n. 1.<br/>

FRIEND, Sir John, ii. 183.<br/>

FRIENDS, comparing minds, iii. 387;<br/>

  example of good set by them, ii. 478;<br/>

  few houses to be nursed at, iv. 181;<br/>

  future state, in a, ii. 162; iii. 312, 438; iv. 279-80;<br/>

  Goldsmith and the story of Bluebeard, ii. 181;<br/>

  'he that has friends has no friend,' i. 207; iii. 149, 289, 386;<br/>

  natural, iv. 147, 198, n. 4; v. 105;<br/>

  pleasure in talking over past scenes, iii. 217;<br/>

  survivor, the, iii. 312.<br/>

FRIENDSHIP, Christian virtue, how far a, iii. 289;<br/>

  formed, how, iii. 165;<br/>

  formed mostly by caprice or chance, iv. 280;<br/>

  often formed ill, ii. 162;<br/>

  mathematics, not as in, iii. 65;<br/>

  neglect of it, iv. 145;<br/>

  'repair,' need of, i. 300;<br/>

  rupture of old, v. 89, 147;<br/>

  test, put to the, iii. 238, 396.<br/>

<i>Friendship, an Ode</i>, i. 158; ii. 25.<br/>

FRISICK LANGUAGE, i. 475.<br/>

FROOM, iv. 402, n. 2.<br/>

FRUGALITY, iv. 163.<br/>

FRUIT, RAW, iv. 353.<br/>

<i>Frusta Letteraria</i>, iii. 173.<br/>

FRY, Thomas, the painter, iii. 21, n. 1.<br/>

FULLARTON, of Fullarton, iii. 356.<br/>

FULLER, Thomas, his dedications, ii., n. 2.<br/>

<i>Fun and funny</i>, ii. 335, n. 3; iii. 91, n. 2.<br/>

FUNDS, the, iv. 164.<br/>

<i>Further Thoughts on Agriculture</i>, i. 306.<br/>

FUTURE STATE, Boswell leads Johnson to discuss it, ii. 161;<br/>

  confidence in respect to it, iv. 395;<br/>

  due attention to it and to this world, v. 154;<br/>

  gloom of uncertainty, iii. 154;<br/>

  hope in it the basis of happiness, iii. 363;<br/>

  knowledge of friends, ii. 162; iii. 438;<br/>

  things made clear gradually, iii. 199.<br/>
</p>

<h3>G.</h3>

<p id="id00833" style="margin-left: 0%; margin-right: 0%">GABBLE, iii. 350; iv. 5.
GABRIEL, Don, a Spanish Prince, iv. 195, n. 6.
GAELICK. See SCOTLAND, Highlands, Erse.
GAGNIER,—, ii. 390.
GAIETY, a duty, iii. 136, n. 2.
GALILEO, i. 194, n. 2.
GALLICISMS, iii. 343, n. 3.
GALWAY, Lady, iv. 109.
GAMA, iv. 250.
GAMING, produces no intermediate good, ii. 176;
  more ruined by adventurous trade, iii. 23.
GAMING-CLUB, a, iii. 23.
<i>Ganganelli's Letters</i>, iii. 286.
GAOL FEVER, iv. 176, n. 1.
GARAGANTUA, iii. 255.
GARDEN, a walled, iv. 205.
GARDENERS, good, Scotchmen, ii. 77.
GARDENSTON, Lord (F. Garden), v. 75-6.
GARDINER, Mrs., account of her, i. 242, n. 5; iv. 245-6;
  Johnson's bequest to her, iv. 402, n, 2;
  mentioned, iii. 22, 104, n. 5; iv. 239, n. 2.
GARDNER, T., bookseller, ii. 344.
GARRET, the scholar's, i. 264.
GARRICK, Captain, i. 81; iii. 387.
GARRICK FAMILY, striking likeness in all the members, ii. 462.
GARRICK, David, Abel Drugger, iii. 35;
  Adelphi, house in the, iv. 96, 99;
  airs of a great man, iii. 263;
  appealed to by a drunken physician, iii. 389;
  Archer in <i>The Beaux Stratagem</i>, iii. 52;
  attacks helped his reputation, v. 273;
  avarice, reputation for, iii. 71;
  Baretti's trial, gives evidence at, ii. 97, n. 1, 98;
  Bickerstaff, I., letter from, ii. 82, n. 3;
  <i>Bonduca</i>, epilogue to, ii. 325, n. 2;
  <i>Bon Ton</i>, ii. 325, n. 1;
  book of praise and abuse, kept a, v. 273;
  Boswell, correspondence with: see BOSWELL, correspondence;
  Boswell's <i>Corsica</i>, praises, ii. 46, n. 1;
  Boswell slyly introduces his name, iii. 263;
  British Coffee-house Club, iv. 179, n. 1;
  Brown, Dr. John, said to have assisted, ii. 131;
    brought out his tragedies, ib., n. 2;
  Budgell's <i>Epilogue</i>, anecdote of, iii. 46, n. 3;
  Burke's epitaph on him, ii. 234, n. 6;
  Camden, Lord, intimacy with, iii. 3;
  <i>Chances, The</i>, ii. 233;
  characters, acted a great variety of, iii. 35; iv. 243;
    was not 'transformed' into them, iv. 244;
  Chatham, Lord, correspondence with, ii. 227;
  cheerfullest man of his age, iii. 387;
  Chesterfield, in wit compared with, iii. 69;
  Christmas dinner at his house, ii. 155, n. 2;
  Clive, Mrs., compared with, iv. 243;
  clutching the dagger, v. 46;
  Colson's academy, at, i. 103;
  <i>concoction</i> of a play, iii. 259;
  Congreve and Shakespeare, compares, ii. 85;
  conversation, sprightly, i. 398;
    no solid meat in it, ii. 464;
  Court, at, i. 333, n. 3;
  Cumberland's <i>dishclout face</i>, iv. 384, n. 2;
  Cumberland's <i>Odes</i>, iii. 43, n. 3; iv 432;
  Dane, letter from a, v. 46, n. 2;
  Davies, letter from, iii. 223, n. 2;
  <i>Davy</i>, called, v. 348;
  death, his, iii. 371;
    'eclipsed the gaiety of nations,' i. 82; iii. 387;
  decayed actor, will soon be a, ii. 439;
  decent liver, a, iii. 387;
  declaimer, no, iv. 243;
  Dodsley, quarrels with, i. 325;
  <i>Douglas</i>, rejects, v. 362, n. 1;
  Drury-lane theatre, manager of, i. 181, 196;
  Elphinston's <i>Martial</i>, his opinion of, iii. 258;
  emphasis, wrong, i. 168; v. 127;
  epigrammatist, an, iii. 258;
  excellence shown by his getting £100,000, iii. 184;
  face, wear and tear of his, ii. 410;
  <i>False Delicacy</i>, ii. 48, n. 2;
  father and family, his, iii. 387;
  fine-bred gentleman, fails as a, v. 126;
  first appearance in London, i. 168, n. 3;
  Fitzherbert, affection for, iii. 148, n. l;
  <i>Florizel and Perdita</i>, ii. 78;
  Foote, compared with, iii. 69, 183; v. 391;
  'ghost of a halfpenny,' iii. 264;
    witticism about his bust, iv. 224;
  <i>fortunam reverenter habet</i>, iii. 263;
  French, sameness of the, iv. 15, n. 3;
  friends, but no friend, had, iii. 386;
  funeral, iv. 208;
    account of its pomp, iv. 208;
    Bishop Horne's lines, ib. n. 1;
    the Club called the Literary Club at it, i. 477;
    Johnson at his grave, iii. 371, n. 1;
  generous treatment of authors, ii. 349, n. 6;
  Gentleman, F., letter from, i. 384, n. 2;
  Gibbon, letter from, iii. 128, n. 4;
  Goldsmith's dress, ii. 83;
  <i>Good Natured Man</i>, refuses the, ii. 48, n. 2; iii. 320;
  Gray's <i>Odes</i>, i. 403, n. 1;
  great, courted by the, ii. 227; iii. 263;
  <i>Hamlet</i> rescued from rubbish, ii. 85, n. 7, 204, n. 3;
  Hamlet's soliloquy, iii. 184;
  Hawkesworth and Lord Sandwich, ii. 247, n. 5;
  Hawkins's <i>Siege of Aleppo</i>, iii. 259;
  <i>High Life Below Stairs</i>, iv. 7;
  Hill, Sir John, epigrams on, ii. 38, n. 2;
  Hogarth's account of his acting, iii. 35, n. 1;
  humour, varying, iii. 264;
  illness, sufferings from, iii. 387, n. 1;
  inaccurate in delineating absurdities, iv. 17;
  Ireland, visits, iii. 388, n. 1;
  Johnson affected by his success, i. 167, 216, n. 2; ii. 69;
    attacked by Garrick's correspondents, ii. 69, n. 1;
    attacks on him, accounts for, iii. 184, n. 5;
    awe of, i. 99, n. 1;
    and Chesterfield, i. 260, n. 1;
    designs to write his epitaph, iv. 394, n. 2;
    <i>Dictionary</i>, cited in, iv. 4;
      epigram on it, i. 300;
    as a dramatist, i. 198, I99, n. 2;
    epigram on George II and Cibber, i. 149; v. 350;
    epitaph on Philips, i. 148;
    in the Green Room, i. 201;
    hard on him, v. 244;
    Imitations of Juvenal_, i. 194;
    intercourse with him, iv. 7;
    <i>Irene</i>, acts, i. 196-8;
      suggests the strangling scene in it, 197, n. 2;
      travels with him to London, i. 101;
    looked upon him as his property, iii. 312;
    let nobody attack him, i. 27, n. 2, 393, n. 1; iii. 70, 312, n. 1;
    in the Lichfield play-house, ii. 299;
    low opinion of his acting, ii. 92, n. 4; iii. 184; iv. 7; v. 38;
      and of his mimicry, ii. 326, n. 3;
    mimicks, ii. 326, 464;
    mow of hay, ii. 79;
    offers to write his <i>Life</i>, iii. 371, n. 1; iv. 99, n. 2;
    'played round,' ii. 82;
    praises his prologues, ii. 325;
    parody of Percy's <i>Hermit</i>, ii. 136, n. 4;
    writes him a <i>Prologue</i>, i. 181; iv. 25;
    pupil; i. 97:
    into good spirits, puts, iii. 260, n. 5;
    <i>Rambler</i>, i. 209, n. 1;
    reflection on him in his <i>Shakespeare</i>, ii. 192; iv. 371, n. 2;
    and the Roundhouse, i. 249, 251;
    sends his love to, v. 350;
    <i>Shakespeare</i>, not mentioned in, ii. 92; v. 244;
    sorrow for his death, iii. 371; iv. 99;
    taste in theatrical merit, ii. 465;
    thinking which side he should take, iii. 24;
    tribute to him, i. 81; iv. 96, n. 6;
    use of orange-peel, ii. 330;
    want of taste for the highest poetry, iii. 151;
    wife, account of, i. 95, 98, 99;
    wit, ii. 231; Kenrick's libel, i. 498, n. 1;
  Kitely, ii. 92, n. 3;
  Latin, has not enough, ii. 377;
  lawyer, intends to become a, i. 101;
  Lear, ii. 182, n. 3: <i>Lethe</i>, i. 228;
  liberality, gave more money than any man, iii. 70, 264, 387;
    instances of his, iii. 264, n. 3;
  Lichfield grocer, scorned by a, iii. 35, n. 1;
  Lichfield School, at, i. 45, n. 4;
  life with great uniformity, saw, iii. 386;
  Literary Club, election to the, i. 479-481;
    name given at his funeral, i. 477; v. 109, n. 5;
  low characters, ashamed of his, iii. 35;
  Mallet, fooled by, v. 175, n. 2;
  manner, his significant smart, v. 249;
  Marplot, i. 325, n. 3;
  <i>Memoirs</i> by T. Davies, iii. 434, n. 5;
  Mickle, quarrels with, ii. 182, n. 3; v. 349, n. 1;
  Milton's granddaughter's benefit, i. 227;
  money, great hunger for, iii. 387;
  money exhausted, his, i. 102, n. 2;
  Montagu's, Mrs., <i>Essay</i>, praises, ii. 88;
    praised by her, v. 245;
  More, Hannah, flatters him, iii. 293;
    his kindness to her, ib. n. 4;
    calls her <i>Nine</i>, iv. 96, n. 3;
  Murphy, controversy with, i. 327, n. 1;
    sarcasm against him, ii. 349;
    praise of his liberality, iii. 264, n. 3;
  nation to admire him, has a, iv. 7;
  Necker, Mme., on his acting, v. 38, n. 2;
  niece, his, Miss Doxy, iii. 417-8:
  <i>Ode on Pelham's death</i>, i. 269;
  ostentation, i. 216, n. 2;
  parsimony, Foote's ghost of a halfpenny, iii. 264;
    Peg Woffington's tea, ib.;
    refuses an order to Mrs. Williams, i. 392;
  Partridge in <i>Tom Jones</i>, v. 38;
  pious reverence, i. 269;
  poor at first, iii. 70, 387;
  portraits at Streatham, iv. 158, n. 1;
    in Mrs. Garrick's house, iv. 96;
    Beauclerk's inscription on one, ib.;
  profession, advanced the dignity of his, ii. 234, n. 6; iii. 263;
    'his profession made him rich, and he made it respectable,'
iii. 371, n. 2;
  professor in the imaginary college, v. 108;
  Prospero, i. 216;
  provincial accents, ii. 464, n. 2;
  Queen, compliments the, ii. 233;
  retiring from the stage, ii. 438; iii. 388;
  Reynolds's defence of him, ii. 234;
  Riccoboni, Mme.,
    letters from, ii. 50, n. 3; in. 149, n. 2; v. 106, n. 4, 330, n. 3;
  Richard III, his, seen by Hogarth, in. 35, n. 1
    Johnson's sarcasm on, iii. 184;
    was not 'transformed into,' iv. 244;
  <i>Romeo and Juliet</i>, alters, v. 244, n. 2:
  <i>Sallad</i>, proposes, as a name for <i>The World</i>, i. 202, n. 4;
  scholarship, ii. 377, n. 2;
  Scotch, nationality of the, ii. 325;
  Scotland, never in, iii. 388;
  'Scrub, will play,' iii. 70;
  sensibility as a writer, ii. 79;
  sentiment, his, ii. 464;
  Shakespeare Jubilee, ii. 68, n. 2, 69;
  Shakespeare, scarce
    editions of, ii. 192;
    intends to read, v. 244, n. 2;
  Sheridan, Thomas, engages, i. 358, n. 3;
    describes the vanity of, ii. 87;
  Smith's, Adam, conversation, iv. 24, n. 2;
  splendour, too much, iii. 71;
  spoilt, not, iii. 263, n. 3, 264;
  Steevens, letters from, ii. 274, n. 7; 284, n. 2;
    slandered by, iii. 281, n. 3;
  table, at the head of a, iv. 243;
  talking from books, v. 378, n. 4;
  Thrales, introduction to the, i. 493, n. 2;
  universality in acting, ii. 37; iv. 243; v. 126;
  unkindness, accused by Davies of, iii. 223, n. 2;
  vanity, ii. 227; iii. 263, 264;
  variety his excellence, iii. 35;
  Walpole, H., on his acting, iv. 243, n. 6;
  wealth, iii. 184, 263;
  Whitehead, W., compliments him in verse, i. 402;
    engaged as his 'reader,' ib. n. 3;
    proposed to Goldsmith as arbitrator, iii. 320, n. 2;
  wife, love for his, iv. 96, n. 7; v. 349, n. 2;
  <i>Winter's Tale</i>, new version of the, ii. 78, n. 4;
  witness, examined as a, v. 243;
  woman's riding-hood, in a, iv. 7;
  <i>Wonder, The</i>, in, iv. 8;
  writer, sprightly, iii. 263;
  Woffington, Peg, iii. 264;
  mentioned, i. 243, 268, n. 4; ii. 59, n. 3, 110, 255, 362, n. 2;
iii. 256.
GARRICK, Mrs., dinners at her house, iv. 96-9; 220, n. 3;
  grief for her husband, iv. 96;
  leaves Garrick's funeral expenses, unpaid, iv. 208, n. 1;
  neglects Johnson's proposal to write Garrick's Life, iii. 371, n. 1;
iv. 99, n. 2;
  survived Garrick forty-three years, iv. 96, n. 7, 275, n. 3;
  mentioned, iv. 84, n. 3.
GARRICK, George, Johnson's pupil, i. 97;
  calls him 'a tremendous companion,' i. 496, n. 1; iii. 139.
GARRICK, Peter, anecdotes of <i>Irene</i>, i. 100, 111;
  resemblance to his brother, ii. 311, 462, 466;
  mentioned, ii. 467; iii. 35, n. 1, 412; iv. 57, n. 3.
GARTH, Sir Samuel, M.D., lines on dying, ii. 107,  n. 1;
  Johnson's praise of physicians, iv. 263.
GASTRELL, Bishop, v. 323.
GASTRELL, Rev. Mr.,
  cut down Shakespeare's mulberry-tree, i. 83, n. 4; ii. 470.
GASTRELL, Mrs., i. 83, n. 4; ii. 470; iii. 412.
GATAKER, Thomas, v. 302.
GATES, General, iii. 355, n. 3.
GAUBIUS, Professor, i. 65.
<i>Gaudium</i>, ii. 371.
GAUDY, College, i. 60, n. 4, 273, n. 2; ii. 445, n. 1.
GAY, John, advised to buy an annuity, v. 60, n. 4;
  <i>Beggar's Opera</i>, 'As men should serve a cucumber,' v. 289;
    Boswell's delight in it, ii. 368; iii. 198;
    projected work on it, v. 91, n. 2;
    Burke thinks it has no merit, iii. 321;
    Cibber, refused by, iii. 321, n. 3;
    Hockley in the Hole, iii. 134, n. 1;
    Johnson's opinion of it, iii. 321;
    Johnson turns Captain Macheath, IV. 95;
    morality, its, ii. 367;
      'labefactation,' ib.;
    'practical philosophers,' ii. 442;
    Rich made <i>gay</i> and Gay <i>rich</i>, iii. 321, n. 3;
    run of 63 nights, iii. 116, n. 1;
  children, writing for, ii. 408, n. 3;
  <i>Letters</i>, iv. 36, n. 4;
  <i>Life</i> by Johnson, ii. 367;
  Orpheus of highwaymen, ii. 367, n. 1;
  Queensberry, Duke of, ii. 368.
<i>Gazetteer, The</i>, v. 245, n. 2.
GELALEDDIN, iv. 195, n. 1.
'GELIDUS, the philosopher,' i. 101, n. 3.
GELL, Mr. and Mrs., v. 430-1.
GELL, Sir William, ii. 408, n. 3; v. 431, n. 4.
<i>General Advertiser</i>, i. 227.
GENERAL ASSEMBLY. See under SCOTLAND.
GENERAL CENSURE, iv. 313.
GENERAL COMPLAINTS, Johnson's dislike of, ii. 357.
GENERAL WARRANTS, ii. 72.
GENERALS, great, ii. 234.
GENIUS, ii. 436-7; iii. 385, n. 1; v. 34-5;
  made feminine, iii. 374.
GENOA, Corsican revolt, ii. 59, n. 2, 71, n. 1;
  the Doge at Versailles, iv. 270, n. 2.
GENTEEL PEOPLE, swear less than formerly, ii. 166, n. 1.
GENTILITY, not inseparable from morality, ii. 340;
  new system, i. 491-2;
  women more genteel than men, iii. 53.
<i>Gentle Shepherd</i>, ii. 220; v. 374, n. 3.
GENTLEMAN, Francis, i. 384.
GENTLEMAN, English merchant a new species, i. 491, n. 3.
GENTLEMAN, a, of eminence in the literary world, iv. 274;
  one whose house was frequented by low company, iv. 312;
  a penurious one, iv. 176;
  one recommending his brother, iv. 21;
  one who was rich, but without conversation, iv. 83.
GENTLEMAN FARMER, at Ashbourne, iii. 188, 197.
<i>Gentleman's Magazine</i>, account of it, i. III;
  effect on it of rebellion of 1745-6, i. 176, n. 2;
  Hanoverian in 1745-6, i. 176, n. 2;
  indecency in earlier numbers, i. 112, n. 2;
  Johnson, <i>Ad Urbanum</i>, i. 113;
    becomes a regular contributor, i. 115;
    writes <i>Addresses, Letters, and Prefaces</i>, i. 139-40, 147, 149,153,
157, 161: (for his other contributions See under their several titles);
    school advertised in it, i. 97;
    verses wrongly assigned to, i. 178, n. 1;
  Nichols, edited by, iv. 437;
    described by Southey, ib.;
  numbers sold, i. 112, n. i, 152, n. 1; iii. 322;
  obituaries, i. 237, n. I;
  prize poems, i. 91;
  published at the end of the month, i. 340, n. 3;
  'Sciolus,' iii. 341, n. 1;
  value of, in 1754, i. 256, n. 1.
  See under CAVE and DEBATES.
<i>Gentleman's Religion</i>, iv. 311.
<i>Gentlewoman, the born</i>, ii. 130.
GENTLEWOMAN, a, in liquor, ii. 434.
<i>Geographical Grammar</i>, iv. 311.
<i>Geography, Dictionary of Ancient</i>.
  See MACBEAN, Alexander.
GEOLOGY, of Etna, ii. 468, n. 1;
  Johnson's ignorance of it, v. 290, n. 4.
GEOMETRY, principles soon comprehended, v. 138, n. 2.
GEORGE I, Brett, Miss, i. 174, n. 2;
  burnt two wills made in favour of his son, ii. 342, n. 1;
  death, his, ii. 342, n. 1;
  knew nothing, ii. 342;
  Oxford, sends a troop of horse to, i. 281, n. i;
  Shebbeare, satirised by, iii. 15, n. 3;
  will, his, destroyed by George II, ii. 342; iv. 107, n. 1;
  wish to restore the crown, ii. 342.
GEORGE II, Augustus, not an, i. 209;
  barbarity, his, i. 147;
  challenged by Elwall, ii. 164, 251;
  clemency, his, i. 146;
  English weary of him, i. 363;
  fast day of Jan. 30, observed the, ii. 152, n. 1;
  George I's will, destroys, ii. 342;
    quarrels with Frederick the Great about it, iv. 107;
  Johnson's epigram on him, i. 149; v. 348, 350, 404;
    roars against him, ii. 342;
    would tell the truth of him, v. 255;
  Pelham's death, i. 269, n. 1.
  Pretender's visit to London, v. 201, n. 4;
  quiet times under the Whigs, iv. 100;
  mentioned, i. 149, n. 3, 311, n. 2.
GEORGE III, Addresses in 1784, iv. 265;
  authority partly reestablished, iv. 264;
  baronetcies, ii. 354, n. 2;
  Beattie, interview with, v. 90, n. 1;
  Beckford's speech, iii. 201, n. 3;
  birthday, iv. 128;
  'born a Briton', i. 129, n. 3, 353; v. 204;
  Boswell's relation, v. 379;
  <i>Capability</i> Brown, intimacy with, iii. 400, n. 2;
  carelessness in sentences of death, iii. 121, n. 1;
  Chatham's and Garrick's funerals, iv. 208, n. 1;
  city address in 1781, iv. 139, n. 4;
  concessions to the people, ii. 353;
  contempt of Irish peerages, iii. 407, n. 4;
  coronation, iii. 9, n. 2;
  Corsica offered to him, ii. 71, n. 1;
  Dalrymple, Sir John, ii. 210, n. 2;
  Dodd's case, iii. 121;
  fast of Jan. 30, ii. 152, n. 1;
  Fox, the King's competitor, iv. 279;
    divides the kingdom with him, iv. 292;
  Gordon Riots, iii. 429, 431;
  Great Personage, i. 219;
  Gustavus III, death of, iii. 134, n. 1;
  <i>Heroic Epistle</i>, reads the, iv. 113, n. 4;
  hopes formed of him, i. 363;
  Hume on the weakness of his government, iii. 46, n. 5;
  Hutton the Moravian, iv. 410, n. 6;
  indecency, treated with, iv. 261;
  <i>Irene</i>, has the sketch of, i. 108;
  Johnson, asks, to write a <i>Life of Spenser</i>, iv. 410;
    compliments him in <i>The False Alarm</i>, ii. 112;
    <i>Dedications</i>, ii. 44; iii. 113;
    for the King against Fox, iv. 292;
    gives him his <i>Western Islands</i>, ii. 290;
    four volumes of the <i>Lives</i>, iii. 372, n. 3;
    interview with, ii. 33;
      account of it, ii. 42; iii. 32; v. 125, n. 1;
      second interview, ii. 42, n. 2;
    pension, i. 372; v. 379;
      proposed addition to it, iv. 350, n. 1;
    projected works, has the list of, iv. 381, n. 1;
  madness, iv. 165, n. 3;
  manners, his, described by Adams, Johnson and Wraxall, ii. 40-1;
  militia camps, visits the, iii. 365;
  minister, his own, i. 424, n. 1; ii. 355, n. 1;
  ministers his tools, iii. 408, n. 4;
  oppressed by them, iv. 170;
  Norton's speech to him as Speaker, ii. 472, n. 2;
  Paoli, notices, v. 1, n. 3;
  patron of science and the arts, i. 372;
  petitions in 1769, ii. 90, n. 5;
  Pretender, proper designation for the, v. 185, n. 4;
  recruiting, complains of the difficulty of, iii. 399, n. 3.
  reign very factious, iv. 200, 296; very unfortunate, iv. 200;
  <i>respectable</i> empire, his, iii. 241, n. 2;
  Reynolds, slights, iv. 366, n. 2;
  Rousseau's pension, ii. 12, n. 1;
  Scotch favourites, i. 363;
  sea, at the age of 34 had not seen the, i. 340; n. 1;
  Shakespeare sad stuff, i. 497, n. 1;
  Shelburne, Lord, dislikes, iv. 174, n. 5;
  slave-trade, upholder of the, ii. 480;
  <i>She Stoops to Conquer</i>, sees, ii. 223;
  Toryism or Whiggism, prevalence in his reign of, ii. 221;
  tour in the West of England, iv. 165, n. 3;
  unpopularity maintained by Johnson, iii. 155; iv. 165;
    changed into popularity, iii. 156, n. 1; iv. 165;
  Wilkes at the Levee, iii. 430, n. 4.
GEORGE IV, i. 108, n. 1. See PRINCE OF WALES.
GEORGIA, i. 127, n. 4.
GERARD, Dr., v. 90, 92-3, 130.
GERMAINE, Lord George, i. 424, n. 1.
GERMAN BARON, story of a, ii. 462.
GERMANY, academies at the smaller Courts, v. 276;
  language, ii. 156;
  rising in power, ii. 127, n. 4;
  stocking industry, v. 86.
GERVES, John, v. 297, n. 1, 327.
GESTICULATION RIDICULED, i. 334; ii. 211;
  Johnson's aversion to it, iv. 322.
GHERARDI, Marchese, iii. 326.
GHOSTS, Addison's belief, iv. 95;
  argument against their existence, belief for it, iii. 230;
  Boswell introduces the subject, iv. 94, n. 2;
  Cave, one seen by, ii. 178, 182;
  Coachmakers' Hall, discussion at, iv. 95;
  Cock Lane ghost, i. 406-8; iii. 268;
  evidence for them, iv. 94;
  experience and imagination, i. 405;
  Goldsmith's brother, one seen by, ii. 182;
  Johnson's prayer on his wife's death, i. 235;
  his state of mind as regards them, i. 343, 406; iii. 297; iv. 94, 298;
  'machinery of poetry,' iv. 17;
  objection to their appearing, ii. 163;
  Parson Ford's, iii. 349;
  question undecided after 5000 years, iii. 230,298;
  Southey on the good end they answer, iii. 298, n. 1;
  Villiers, Sir George, iii. 351;
  Wesley's story of a ghost, iii. 297, 394.
GIANNONE, iv. 3.
GIANO VITALE, iii. 251, n. 2.
GIANT'S CAUSEWAY, iii. 410.
GIANTS, A Great Personage's, i. 219.
GIARDINI, ii. 225.
GIBBON, Edward,
  author best judge of his own performance, iv. 251, n. 2;
  <i>Autobiography</i>, ii. 448, n. 2;
  <i>Beggar's Opera</i>, influence of the, ii. 367, n. 1;
  Boswell attacks him, ii. 67, n. 1, 443, n. 1, 447-8; v. 203, n. 1;
    name passed over by him, ii. 348, n. 1;
    and Johnson, replies to, ii. 448, n. 2;
  <i>Cecilia</i>, reads, iv. 223, n. 5;
  Clarendon's <i>History</i> and the Oxford riding-school, ii. 424, n. 1;
  <i>Decline and Fall</i>, 'artful infidelity' of the, ii. 447;
    composition of vol. I, ii. 236, n. 2, 366;
    publication, ii. 136, n. 6; iii. 97, n. 3;
    rough MS. sent to the press, iv. 36, n. 1;
    the two offensive chapters, iii. 244;
  domestic discipline, i. 46, n. 2;
  dress, his, ii. 443, n. 1;
  Duke of Gloucester, ii. 2, n. 2;
  Edinburgh society, ii. 53, n. 1;
  fame, enjoyment of his, i. 451, n. 3;
  Foster, Dr. James, iv. 9, n. 5;
  Fox at Lausanne, iv. 167, n. 1;
  Fox commenced patriot, iv. 87, n. 1;
  French Assembly, iv. 434;
  French society, iii. 254, n. 1;
  Gloucester, Duke of, affability of the, ii. 2, n. 2;
  Hailes's <i>Annals</i>, iii. 404, n. 3;
  history attacked in his presence, ii. 366;
  Holroyd, visits to, iii. 178, n. 1;
  'hornets, accustomed to the buzzing of the,' ii. 448, n. 1;
  Horsley, Bishop, praises, iv. 437;
  hospitality, on, iv. 222, n. 2;
  House of Commons and Nowell's sermon, iv. 296, n. 1;
  Hume and Robertson, compliment to, ii. 236, n. 3;
  Hume congratulates him, ii. 447, n. 5;
  Hume's style, i. 439, n. 2;
  Inquisition, defends the, i. 465, n. 1;
  Johnson and the bear, ii. 348;
    and the ladies, iv. 73:
      did not like to trust himself with, ii. 366;
    and Fox, iii. 267;
    and the graces, iii. 54;
    matched with, ii. 348;
    'Reynolds's oracle,' i. 245, n. 3;
    scarcely mentioned in his writings, ii. 348, n. 1;  iii. 128, n. 4;
    style, imitates, iv. 389;
    talks: of his ugliness, iv. 73;
  <i>Journal des Savans</i>, ii. 39, n. 3;
  Law, William, character of, i. 68, n. 2;
  lectures, teaching by, ii. 8, n. 1;
  Literary Club, i. 479. 481, n. 3; iii. 230, n. 5;
    in 1777, iii. 128, n. 4;
    poisons it to Boswell, ii. 443, n. 1;
  London, loves the dust of, iii. 178, n. 1;
    the liberty that it gives, iii. 379, n. 2;
  Lowth and Warburton,  ii. 37, n. 2;
  Macaulay, on his poverty, iv. 350. n. 1;
  Mackintosh's  comparison of him with Burke, ii. 348, n. 1;
  Magdalen College Common-room, ii. 443, n. 4;
  'Mahometan,' ii. 448;
  Mallet, David, i. 268, n. 1;
  Maty, Dr., i. 284, n. 2;
  Montagu, Mrs., on the <i>Decline and Fall</i>, iii. 244;
  mutual gain in fair trade, v. 232, n. 1;
  Newton, Bishop, iv. 285, n. 3, 286, n. 1;
  North, Lord, v. 269, n. 1;
  <i>Ossian</i>, ii. 302, n. 2;
  Oxford tutor, his, iii. 13, n. 3;
  Paley's attack on him, v. 203, n. 1;
  Pantheon, ii. 169, n. 1;
  'Papist, turned,' ii. 448;
  Parliament, silent in, ii. 366, n. 4; iii. 233, n. 2;
    found it a school of civil prudence, ib.;
  Pope's lines applied to him, ii. 133, n. 1;
  post-chaise, delight in a, ii. 453, n. 1;
  Price, Dr., iv. 434; Priestley, Dr., iv. 437;
  quaint manner, iii. 54:
    described by Colman, ib., n. 2;
  <i>respectable</i>, use of the term, iii. 241, n. 2;
  Reynolds's, dines at, iii. 250;
  Round-Robin, signed the, iii. 83;
  Royal Academy Professor, ii. 67, n. 1;
  school life not happy, i. 451, n. 2;
  sneer, his usual, iv. 73;
  style, study of, iv. 389, n. 2;
  subscription to the Articles, ii. 150, n. 7;
  Ten Persecutions, The, ii. 255, n. 4;
  Tillemont, praises, i. 7, n. 1;
  travelling, the requisites for, iii. 458-9;
  ugliness, ii. 443, n. 1; iv. 73.
GIBBON, an attorney, ii. 93, n. 3.
GIBBONS, Rev. Dr., iv. 126, 278.
GIBRALTAR, ii. 391.
GIBSON, William, iv. 402, n. 2.
GIFFARD, the theatre manager, i. 168.
GIFFORD, Rev. Richard, v. 118.
GIFFORD, William, <i>Baviad and Macviad</i>, iii. 16, n. 1;
  Johnson's Greek, v. 458, n. 5.
GILBERT, GEOFFREY, <i>Law of Evidence</i>, v. 389, n. 5.
GILBERT, Rev. Mr., i. 173, n. 1.
GILLAM, Justice, iii. 46, n. 5.
GILLESPIE, Dr., iv. 262.
GILMOUR, J., President of the Session, v. 212.
GILPIN, W., v. 431.
GIN. See SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS.
GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS, iii. 304, n. 4.
GISBORNE, Dr., iii. 149, n. 2.
GLANVILLE, i. 205, n. 3.
<i>Glasse's, Mrs., Cookery</i>, iii. 285.
GLASS-HOUSES, i. 164, n. 1.
GLAUCUS, ii. 129, n. 5.
GLEG, Mr., a merchant, v. 73.
GLENGARY, Laird of, v. 190.
GLENMORISON, Laird of, v. 136, 140.
GLOOM, gloomy penitence, iii. 27;
  'it is perhaps sinful to be gloomy,' iv. 142.
GLOUCESTER, v. 322, n. 1.
GLOUCESTER, Duke of (brother of George III),
  affability to Gibbon, his, ii. 2, n. 2;
  marriage, ii. 224, n. 1.
GLOVER, Richard, account of him, v. 116, n. 4;
  Duke of Marlborough's papers, v. 175, n. 2;
  <i>Leonidas</i>, v. 116;
  <i>Medea</i>, i. 326, n. 3.
GLOW-WORM, ii. 55, 232.
GLUTTONY, i. 468.
GLYNNE, Serjeant, iii. 430, n. 4.
'Gnothi seauton' [original text in greek], i. 298, n. 4.
GOBELINS, ii. 390.
GOD, infinite goodness, limited, iv. 299;
  love of him predominated over by fear, iii. 339.
GODWIN, William, iv. 278, n. 3.
GOLDONI, iii. 162, n. 4.
GOLDSMITH, Dr. Isaac, Dean of Cloyne, i. 414, n. 6.
GOLDSMITH, Rev. Henry, ii. 182.
GOLDSMITH, Mrs., iii. 100.
GOLDSMITH, Oliver,
  absurdity, angry when caught in an, iii. 252;
  Addison, compared with, ii. 256;
  ages at which he published his various works, iii. 167, n. 3;
  Aleppo, projected visit to, iv. 22;
  anecdotes, excelled by Percy in, v. 255;
  <i>Animated Nature</i>, engaged in writing it, ii. 181-2, 232, 237;
     copy in Lord Scarsdale's library, iii. 162;
     cow shedding its horns, iii. 84, n. 2;
     Maclaurin's yawns, iii. 15;
  anonymous publications, i. 412;
  <i>Apology to the public</i>, ii. 209;
  supposed to be written by Johnson, ib.;
  architecture, contempt  of, ii. 439, n. 1;
  attacks, better for, v. 274;
  authors, the neglect of, iii. 375, n. 1, 424, n. 1;
  authors, patrons and booksellers, v. 59, n. 1:
  Baretti, dislikes, ii. 205, n. 3;
  at his trial, ii. 97, n. 1;
  Bath, describes, ii. 7,<i> n</i>. 4; iii. 45, n. 1;
  beat, first time he has, ii. 210;
  Beattie's <i>Essay on Truth</i>, despises, ii. 201,<i> n</i>.
    3; v. 273, n. 4;
  Beauclerk describes him, ii. 192, n. 2;
  <i>Beauties of English Poetry Selected</i>, iii. 192, n. 2;
  <i>Bee, The</i>, iii. 83, n. 1;
  biography, the uses of, v. 79, n. 3;
  birth, date of his, i. 58, n. 2; iii. 83, n. 1;
  blank verse, on, i. 427, n. 2;
  bloom-coloured coat, ii. 83;
  boastfulness, i. 414:
  <i>bon ton</i> breaking out in his waistcoats, ii. 274, n. 7;
  books, could not tell what was in his own, iii. 253;
  Boswell's account of him, i. 411-17;
    accused of making a monarchy of what should be a republic, ii. 257:
    'honest Goldsmith,' ii. 186;
    preserves a relic of him, ii. 219, n. 2;
    takes leave of him, ii. 260;
  Burke's contemporary at Trinity College, i. 411;
    recollection of him, iii. 168;
  Camden, Lord, complains of, iii. 311;
  Chamier's estimate of him, iii. 252;
  Chatterton's poems, believes in, iii. 51, n. 2, 276, n. 2;
  Cibber, Colley, praises, iii. 72, n. 2;
  <i>Citizen of the World</i>, i. 412;
  Clare, Lord, ii. 136;
  Clarke, Dr., anecdote of, i. 3, n. 2;
  companion, not an agreeable, iii. 247;
  company, his, liked, ii. 235;
  compilations and magazines, the causes of, v. 59, n. 1;
  consequential at times, ii. 258;
  conversation, does not know how to get off, ii. 196;
    not temper for it, ii. 231;
    reported a mere fool in it, i. 412;
    talks at random, 413; ii. 236; iii. 252; v. 277;
    talks not to be unnoticed, ii. 186, 257;
  corrections in his prose composition rare, iv. 36, n. 1;
  Cow shedding its horns: See above, <i>Animated Nature</i>;
  Croaker, Johnson's <i>Suspirius</i>, i. 213; ii. 48;
  <i>Cross Readings</i>, admires, iv. 322, n. 2;
  Cumberland, disliked, iv. 384, n. 2;
  death, ii. 274, n. 7, 279, n. 2, 280; iii. 164; iv. 84, n. 2;
  debts, ii. 280, 281;
  depopulation, on, ii. 217, n. 5;
  <i>Deserted Village</i>, dedicated to Reynolds, ii. I, n. 2, 217, n. 5;
     Johnson's lines in, ii. 7; iii. 418;
     reiterated corrections, ii. 15, n. 3;
     <i>Traveller</i>, sometimes an echo of the, ii. 236;
  <i>Dictionary of Arts and Sciences</i> projected, ii. 204, n. 2;
  Dilly's, dines at, ii. 247;
  'Doctor Minor,' v. 97;
  Dodd, Dr., satirises, iii. 139, n. 4;
  Dodsley, dispute on the poetry of the age with, iii. 38;
  dog-butchers, ii. 232;
  dress, slovenly, i. 366, n. 1;
    his fine coat, ii. 83;
    effect of dress on the mind, ib. n. 3;
  Dryden's line on poets and monarchs, ii. 223:
  duelling, question of, ii. 179;
  Dyer, Samuel, at the Club, iv. II, n. 1;
  Edinburgh, country round, i. 425; ii. 311, n. 5;
  Edinburgh University, i. 411, 425;
  <i>Elements of Criticism</i>, criticises, ii. 90;
  <i>Enquiry into the present State of Polite Learning</i>, i. 350, n. 3, 412;
  envy, his, i. 413; ii. 42, 260;
    Boswell's defence of it, iii. 271;
  epitaph in Greek, ii. 282; iii. 85, n. 1;
  epitaph in Latin, iii. 81-3;
  <i>Round Robin</i>, 84;
  Europe, disputed his passage through, i. 411;
  Evans, assaults, ii. 209, n. 2;
  excelled in what he wrote, iii. 253;
  fable of the little fishes, ii. 231;
  fame, his, v. 137;
  fame, talked for, iii. 247;
  Fantoccini, the, i. 414;
  flowered late, iii. 167;
  France, tour to, i. 414;
  French meat, ii. 402, n. 2;
  friendship and the story of Bluebeard, ii. 181;
  'furnishing you with argument and intellects,' iv. 313, n. 4;
  Garrick's compliment to the Queen, attacks, ii. 233;
    lines on him, i. 412, n. 6;
    refuses <i>The Good Natured Man</i>, iii. 320;
    proposes Whitehead as arbitrator, ib. n. 2;
  'Gentleman, The,' ii. 182;
  George III, and <i>She Stoops to Conquer</i>, ii. 223;
  gets the better when he argues alone, ii. 236;
  ghost seen by his brother, ii. 182;
  'Goldy,' dislikes  being called, ii. 258; iii. 101; v. 308;
  <i>Good Natured Man</i>, Prologue, ii. 42, 45:
    Croaker, i. 213; ii. 48;
    refused by Garrick, iii. 320;
  Gray, attacks, i. 403, n. 1; ii. 328, n. 2;
    <i>Elegy</i>, mends, i. 404, n. 1;
  'happy revolutions,' ii. 224;
  Harris, James, ii. 225;
  <i>Haunch of Venison</i>, ii. 136, n. 5; iii. 225, n. 2;
  Hawkins's account of him, i. 480, n. 1;
  '<i>Hesiod</i>' Cooke, v. 37, n. 1;
  historians, in the first class of, ii. 236;
  <i>History of England</i> attributed to Lord Lyttelton, i. 412, n. 2;
  _History  of Rome, ii. 236-7; iv. 312;
  Hornecks, Miss, ii. 209, n. 2; iv. 355, n. 4;
  horses, abhorrence of blood, ii. 232;
  <i>Humours of Ballamagairy</i>, ii. 219;
  <i>Idler</i>, buys the, i. 335, n. 1;
  ignorance of common arts, iv. 22;
  improvidence, i. 416, n. 1;
  inscriptions on the <i>written mountains</i>, iv. 22, n. 3;
  'inspired idiot,' i. 412, n. 6;
  irascible as a hornet, v. 97, n. 3;
  Jacobitism, his, ii. 224, 238, n. 4;
  jests from the pit of a theatre, on, i. 197, n. 2;
  Johnson, arguing: see JOHNSON, arguing;
    a bear only in the skin, ii. 66;
    the 'big man,' ii. 14;
    biographer, i. 26, n. 1:
    buys his <i>Life</i> of Nash, i. 335, n. 1;
      and a print of him, i. 363, n. 3;
    claim upon—for more writings, ii. 15;
    compared with Burke, ii. 260;
    competition with, i. 417; ii. 216, 257;
    compliment a cordial, iii. 82, n. 3;
    could take liberties with, iv. 113;
    estimation of him as an author, i. 408; ii. 196, 216;
      places him in the first class, ii. 236;
      defends him against Mr. Eliot's attack, ii. 265, n. 4;
      calls him a very great man, ii. 281;
      defends him against attack at Reynolds's table, ib., n. 1;
      shows the difference when he had not a pen in his hand, iv. 29;
      got him sooner into estimation, ii. 216;
    first visit to him, i. 366, n. 1;
    goodness of heart, i. 417;
    influence on his style, i. 222;
    interview with George III, ii. 42;
    jealous of, ii. 257;
    letter to him, ii. 235, n. 2;
    levee, attends, ii. 118;
    literary reputation, ii. 233;
    manner, copies, i. 412;
    not his style, ii. 216;
    pension, iv. 113;
    <i>Prologue to The Good Natured Man</i>, ii. 42, 45;
    proposes  to—that they each review the other's work, v. 274;
    quarrels with, ii. 253-4;
      reconciliation, 256;
    reads the <i>Heroic Epistle</i> to, iv. 113;
    reproaches, with not going to the theatre, ii. 14;
    tetrastick on him, ii. 282;
    tribute to him in the <i>Life of Parnell</i>, ii. 166, n. 2;
    wishes to write his <i>Life</i>, iii. 100, n. 1;
    witty contests with, ii. 231;
  Kenrick, libelled by, i. 498, n. 1;
  knowledge, 'pity he is not knowing,' ii. 196;
    'knows nothing,' ii. 215;
    'amazing how little he knows,' ii. 235;
    'at no pains to fill his mind,' iii. 253;
  Langton, letter to, ii. 141, n. 1;
  Lennox's, Mrs., play, iv. 10;
  <i>Life</i> not included in the <i>Lives of the Poets</i>, iii. 100, n. 1;
  Literary Club, member of the, i. 477; ii. 17;
    absurd verses recited to it, ii. 240; iv. 13;
    wishes for more members, iv. 183;
  Lloyd's supper party, i. 395, n. 2;
  lodgings, miserable, i. 350, n. 3;
    in the Edgeware Road, ii. 182;
  'loose in his principles,' i. 408;
  luxury, effects of, ii. 217, ib. n. 5;
  Madeira, bottle of, i. 416;
  Mallet's reputation, ii. 233;
  Martinelli's <i>History</i>, ii. 221;
  mathematics, made no great figure in, i. 411;
    contempt for them, ii. 437, n. 1;
  medical studies, i. 411;
  merit late to be acknowledged, iii. 252;
  mind, never exchanged, iii. 37;
  modern imitators of the early poets, despises, iii. 159, n. 2;
  Montaigne, love of, iii. 72, n. 2;
  mortified by a German, ii. 257;
  musical performers' pay, ii. 225;
  '<i>mutual</i> acquaintance,' iii. 103, n. 1;
  martyrdom, ii. 250-1;
  <i>Natural History</i>: see <i>Animated Nature</i>;
  nidification, ii. 249;
  'Nihil quod tetigit non ornavit,' i. 412; iii. 82;
  '<i>Nil te quaesiveris extra</i>,' iv. 27;
  Northcote's account of him, i. 413, n. 2;
  Northumberland, Duke of, would have helped him, iv. 22, n. 3;
    the Duchess prints <i>Edwin and Angelina</i>, ii. 337, n. 1;
  novelty, i. 441, n. 1;
  Padua, at, i. 73, n. 2;
  Paoli's, dines at, ii. 220;
  paradox, affectation of, i. 4l7;
  'three paradoxes,' iii. 376, n. 1;
  <i>Parnell, Life of</i>, ii. 166;
  partiality of his friends against him, iii. 252;
  pen in and out of his hand, iv. 29;
  pensions to French authors, i. 372, n. 1;
  Percy's account of him, i. 413, n. 2;
    quarrel with him, iii. 276, n. 2;
  'pleasure of being liked,' i. 412, n. 6;
  Pope's lines on Addison, ii. 85;
    'strain of pride,' iii. 165, n. 3;
  powers, did not know his own, i. 213, n. 4;
  public make a <i>point</i> to know nothing of his writings, iii. 252;
  religion, takes his from the priest, ii. 214;
  <i>Retaliation</i>, passages quoted:
    Attorneys, ii. 126, n. 4;
    Burke, i. 472; iii. 233, n. 1; iv. 318;
    Burke, William, v. 76, n. 3;
    Douglas, Dr., i. 229, n. 1;
    Garrick, i. 202, n. 4;
    his lines on Goldsmith, i. 412, n. 6;
    Lauder, i. 229, n. 1;
    'pepper the highest,' iv. 341, n. 6;
    Townshend, Tommy, iv. 318-9;
      shown to Burke and Mrs. Cholmondeley, iii. 318, n. 3;
  reviewers, ii. 39, n. 4;
  Reynolds's explanation of his absurdities, i. 412, n. 6;
    his envy, i. 4l3, n. 3;
  Robinhood Society, iv. 92, n. 5;
  round of pleasures, ii. 274, n. 3;
  Royal Academy Professor, ii, 67, n. 1;
  Royal Academy dinner, iii. 51, n. 2; iv. 314, n. 3;
  Sappho in Ovid, ii. 181;
  Savage, compared with, ii. 281, n. 1;
  Scotch inns, v. 146, n. 1;
  scrupulous, not, i. 213, n. 4;
  servitorships, v. 122, n. 1;
  settled system, no, i. 414;
    or notions, iii. 252;
  <i>She Stoops to Conquer</i>, copyright of it, iii. 100, n. 1;
    dedicated to Johnson, ii. 1, n. 2, 216;
    Dedication, ib. n. 3;
    dinner on the day of its first performance, iv. 325;
    Duke of Gloucester's marriage, ii. 224;
    Farquhar copied, v. 133, n. 1;
    finding out the longitude, i. 301, n. 3;
    ill success predicted, ii. 208;
    Johnson's opinion, ii. 205, 208, 233;
    naming it, ii. 205, n. 4, 258;
    Northcote's account of it to Goldsmith, ii. 233, n. 3;
    performed during a Court mourning, iv. 325;
    <i>Rambler</i>, borrowed from, i. 213, n. 5;
    song for Miss Hardcastle, ii. 219;
    success on the stage, ii. 208, n. 5;
    Tony Lumpkin's song, ii. 219;
    Walpole's criticism, ii. 233, n. 3;
  Shelburne  and Malagrida, iv. 174;
  <i>shine</i>, eager to, i. 423; ii. 231, 253, 256;
  social, not, iii. 37;
  society, his, courted, ii. 257;
  Sterne, attacks, ii. 173, n. 2;
    calls him a very dull fellow, ii. 222;
  straw, on a balancer of a, iii. 231, n. 2;
  suicide, on, ii. 229;
  Swift's 'strain of pride,' iii. 165, n. 3;
  tailor, taken for a, ii. 83, n. 2;
  tailor's bill, ii. 83, n. 3;
  talk; see conversation;
  'tell truth and shame the devil,' ii. 222;
  Temple, chambers in the, ii. 97, n. 1; iv. 27; v. 37, n. 1;
  Temple of Fame, ii. 358;
  terror, object of, to a nobleman, i. 450, n. 1;
  Townsend, praises Lord Mayor, iv. 175, n. 1;
  <i>Traveller</i>, brings him into high reputation, iii. 252;
    Chamier's  doubts as to the author, iii. 252;
    dedicated to his brother, ii. 1, n. 2;
    editions, i. 415, n. 2;
    Fox praises it, iii. 252, 261;
    Johnson's lines in it, i. 381, n. 2; ii. 6; iii. 418;
    praises it, ii. 5, 236;
    reviews it, i. 482;
    recites a passage, v. 344;
    'Luke's iron crown,' ii. 6;
    payment for it, i. 193, n. 1; ii. 6, n. 3;
    published with author's name, i. 412, n. 2;
    reiterated correction, ii. 15, n. 3;
    <i>slow</i>, iii. 253;
    written after the <i>Vicar</i> but published before, i. 415; iii. 321;
  travelling in youth, on, iii. 458;
  unnoticed, afraid of being, ii. 186;
  Van Egmont's  <i>Travels</i>, reviews, iv. 22, n. 3;
  vanity, i. 413;
    shown in his talk, i. 413;
    his clothes, ii. 83;
    his virtues and vices were from it, iii. 37;
  <i>Vicar of Wakefield</i>, history of its publication, i. 415; iii. 321;
    Johnson's opinion of it, i. 415, n. 3; iii. 321;
    passages expunged, iii. 375-6;
  visionary project, his, iv. 22;
  Walpole despises  him, i. 388, n. 3;
    introduced to him, iv. 314, n. 3;
  Warburton a weak writer, v. 93, n. 1;
  Westminster Abbey and Temple Bar, ii. 238;
    deserved a place in the Abbey, iii. 253;
    spot for his monument chosen by Reynolds, iii. 83, n. 2;
 'Williams, I go to Miss, i. 421;
  <i>Zobeide</i>, wrote a prologue for, iii. 38, n. 5.
GOMBAULD, iii. 396.
GONDAR, v. 123, n. 3.
GOOD-BREEDING, ii. 82; v. 82, 276.
GOOD FRIDAY, ii. 356; iii. 300, 313; iv. 203.
GOOD-HUMOUR, acquired, not natural, v. 211;
  dependent upon the will, iii. 335;
  increases with age, ib.;
    rare, ii. 362;
  Johnson a good-humoured fellow, ib.
'GOOD MAN, a,' iv. 239.
<i>Good Natured Man</i>. See GOLDSMITH.
GOODNESS, not natural, v. 211, 214.
<i>Goody Two Shoes</i>, iv. 8, n. 3.
GORDON, Duke of, iii. 430, n. 6.
GORDON, Hon. Alexander, (Lord Rockville), i. 469; v. 394, 397.
GORDON, Sir Alexander, ii. 269, n. 2; iii. 104; v. 86, 90-2, 95.
GORDON, Captain, of Park, v. 103.
GORDON, General C. G., i. 340, n. 3.
GORDON, Lord George, Mansfield's charge on his trial, iii. 427, n. 1;
  St. George's Field meeting, iii. 428;
  sent to the Tower, iii. 430;
  trial, iv. 87.
GORDON, Professor Thomas, v. 84-5,90-2.
GORDON, Rev. Dr., of Lincoln, iii. 359.
GORDON, Mr. W., Town-clerk of Aberdeen, v. 90, n. 2.
GORDON RIOTS, iii. 427-431, 435, 438.
GORLITZ, ii. 122, n. 6.
GORY, Monboddo's black servant, v. 82-3.
GOSSE, Mr. Edmund, Gray's <i>Works</i>, i. 403, n. 4.
GOTHICK BUILDINGS, i. 273.
GOUGH,—, ii. 397.
GOUT, an attack of, a poetical fiction, i. 179;
  books on it, v. 210;
  due to abstinence, i. 103, n. 3.
GOVERNMENT, by one, best for a great nation, iii. 46;
  contracted-more easily destroyed, iii. 283;
  distance, from a, iv. 213;
  English—on a broad basis, iii. 283;
  fittest men not appointed, ii. 157;
  forms of it indifferent, ii. 170;
  imperfection inseparable from all, ii. 118;
  possible through want of agreement in the governed, ii. 102;
  power cannot be long abused, ii. 170;
  real power everywhere lost (in 1784), iv. 260, n. 2;
  reverence for it impaired, iii. 3:
  See MINISTRY.
<i>Government of the Tongue</i>, Boswell quotes it, iii. 379;
  Johnson perhaps borrows from it, i. 447, n. 2;
  'men oppressive by their parts,' iv. 168, n. 2.
<i>Governor</i>, v. 185, n. 2.
Gower, first Earl, recommends Johnson, i. 133;
  Plaxton's letter to him, i. 36, n. 2;
  <i>Renegado</i>, i. 296.
GOWER, Dr., Provost of Worcester College, ii. 95, n. 2.
GOWER, John, iii. 254.
GRACE, in Latin, v. 65:
  at meals, i. 239, n. 2; ii. 124; v. 123.
GRAFTON, third Duke of, ii. 467.
GRAHAM, Colonel, ii. 156.
GRAHAM, Rev. George, <i>Telemachus</i>, i. 411; iii. 104;
  insults Goldsmith, v. 97.
GRAHAM, Lady Lucy, v. 359, n. 1.
GRAHAM, Marquis of (third Duke of Montrose), iii. 382;
  laughed at in <i>The Rolliad</i>, ib., n. 1;
  loves liberty, iii. 383;
  mentioned, iv. 109.
GRAHAM, Miss, iii. 407.
GRAINGER, Dr. James, character, his, ii. 454;
  Johnson's Shakespeare, anecdote of, i. 319, n. 3;
  <i>Ode on Solitude</i>, iii. 197;
  <i>Sugar Cane</i>, Johnson reviews it, i. 481;
    does not like it, ii. 454;
    <i>mice</i> altered to <i>rats</i>, ii. 453;
  <i>Tibullus</i>, translates, ii. 454.
GRAMMAR, advantage of learning it, v. 136.
GRAMMAR School, Johnson's scheme for the classes of a, i. 99.
GRAND CHARTREUX, iii. 456.
GRAND SIGNOR, ii. 250.
GRANDEES OF SPAIN, v. 358.
GRANGE, Lady, v. 227.
GRANGER, Rev. James,
  <i>Biographical History</i>, iii. 91; v. 255;
  denies that he is a Whig, iii. 91;
  'the dog is a Whig,' v. 255.
GRANT, Abbé, v. 153, n.
GRANT, Sir Archibald, iii. 103.
GRANT, Rev. Mr., v. 120-1, 123,131.
GRANT,—, ii. 308, 310.
GRANTHAM, ii. 312, n. 4.
GRANTHAM, first Baron, i. 434, n. 3.
GRANTLEY, first Baron, ii. 472, n. 2.
GRANVILLE, G. See under Lansdowne, Lord.
GRANVILLE, John Carteret, Earl,
  described by Lord Chesterfield, iv. 12, n. 5;
  despatch after the battle of Dettingen, iv. 12;
  mentioned, ii. 116, n. 1; iv. 78.
GRATITUDE, burthen, a, i. 246;
  fruit of great cultivation, v. 232.
GRATTAN, Henry, 'one link of the English chain,' iv. 317;
  mentioned, iv. 73, n. 1.
<i>Grave, The</i>, iii. 47.
GRAVES, Morgan, i. 92, n. 2.
GRAVES, Rev. Richard,
  author of <i>The Spiritual Quixote</i>, i. 75, n. 3;
  Shenstone at Oxford, i. 94, n. 5;
    property, v. 4S7, n. 4;
  mentioned, ii. 452.
GRAVINA, iv. 199.
GRAY, Sir James, ii. 177.
GRAY, John, bookseller, i. 153.
GRAY, Thomas, abruptness, his, i. 403;
  Akenside, inferior to, iii. 32;
  Beattie, friendship with, v. 16, n. 1;
  blank verse, disliked, i. 427. n. 2;
  Boswell sat up all night reading him, ii. 335, n. 2;
  Boswell's <i>Corsica</i> and Paoli, ii. 46, n. 1;
  Cohnan's <i>Odes to Obscurity</i>, ii. 334;
  <i>disjecta membra</i>, i. 403, n. 4;
  <i>Distant Prospect of Eton College</i> quoted, i. 344;
  doctor's degree offered him at Aberdeen, ii. 267, n. 1;
  Dryden's 'car,' ii. 5, n. 2;
  'dull fellow, a,' ii. 327;
  Elegy, imitated, v. 117, n. 4;
    mended by Goldsmith, i. 404, n. 1;
    quoted, iii. 190, n. 2, 204;
    sneered at, ii. 328, n. 2;
    Young's parody of Johnson's criticism on it, iv. 392, n. 1
      (see just below under Johnson);
  happy moments for writing, i. 203, n. 3;
  Italy, tour to, iii. 31, n. 1;
  Johnson criticises the Elegy, i. 403; ii. 328, n. 2;
      finds two good stanzas, ii. 328;
    criticises the Odes, i. 403; ii. 164, 327, 335; iv. 13, 16, n. 4;
    criticism attacked, iv. 64;
      defended  by Boswell, i. 404;
    cites him in his Dictionary, iv. 4, n. 3;
      praises his Letters, iii. 31, n. 1;
      writes his Life, iii. 427;
      works, did not taste, ii. 335;
    calls him <i>Ursa Major</i>, v. 384, n. 1;
  <i>Long Story</i> cited, v. 292;
  Mackintosh criticises his style, iii. 31, n. 1;
  Mason's Memoirs of him, i. 29;
    higher in them than in his poems, iii. 31;
  'mechanical poet, a,' ii. 327;
  <i>Odeon Vicissitude</i>, iv. 138, n. 4;
  <i>Odes</i> praised by Cumberland's <i>Ode</i>, iii. 43, n. 3;
  Pope's condensation of thought, admires, v. 345, n. 2;
    and his <i>Homer</i>, iii. 257, n. 1;
  <i>Progress of Poetry</i>, quoted, iii. 165, n. 2;
  <i>Remains</i>, his, preparation for publication, ii. 164;
  Sixteen-string Jack, compared to, iii. 38;
  <i>Spleen, The</i>, admires, iii. 38, n. 3;
  Sterne's popularity, ii. 222. n. 1;
  'sunshine of the breast,' v. 160, n. 2;
  'warm Gray,' ii. 334.
<i>Gray's Inn Journal</i>, i. 309, 328, 356.
<i>Great</i>, how pronounced, ii. 161.
GREAT, the, cant against their manners, iii. 353;
  Johnson, never courted by, iv. 116;
    did not seek his society, iv. 117;
      or Richardson's, ib., n. 1;
  officious friends, have, ii. 65, n. 4;
  seeking their acquaintance, ii. 10; iii. 189.
'GREAT HE,' ii. 210.
GREAT MOGUL, ii. 40, n. 4.
GREAVES, Samuel, iv. 253.
GREECE, fountain of knowledge, iii. 333;
  modern Greece swept by the Turks, ii. 194.
GREEK, books for beginners, iii. 407;
Genardus's <i>Grammar</i>, iv. 20;
  essential to a good education, i. 457;
  like lace, iv. 23;
  a woman's knowledge of it, i. 122, n. 4.
  See JOHNSON, Greek.
GREEKS, barbarians mostly, ii. 170;
  dramatists, iv. 16;
  empire, iii. 36.
GREEN, John, Bishop of Lincoln, i. 45.
GREEN, Matthew, iii. 405, n. 1.
GREEN, Richard, of Lichfield, account of him, ii. 465;
  his Museum, ib.; iii. 412;
  Johnson, letter from, iv. 393;
  mentioned, iii. 393; iv. 399, n. 5.
GREEN ROOM, of Drury Lane, i. 201.
<i>Green Sleeves</i>, v. 260.
GREENE, Burnaby, i. 517.
GREENHOUSES, ii. 168; iv. 206.
GREENWICH, Boswell and Johnson's day there, i. 457;
  Hospital, i. 460;
  Johnson composes part of <i>Irene</i> in the Park, i. 106;
  lodges in Church Street, i. 107;
  Park, described by Miss Talbot, i. 106, n. 2;
  not equal to Fleet Street, i. 461.
GREGORY, David, <i>Geometry</i>, v. 294.
GREGORY, Dr. James, iii. 126; v. 48.
GREGORY, Dr. John, v. 48, n. 3.
GREGORY, professors of that name, v. 48, n. 3.
GREGORY, ——, iii. 454.
GRENVILLE, Right Hon. George,
  Beckford's Bribery Bill, supports, ii. 339, n. 2;
  'could have counted the Manilla ransom,' ii. 135;
  Johnson's letter to him, i. 376, n. 2.
<i>Grenville Act</i>, iv. 74, n. 3; v. 391.
GRETNA GREEN, iii. 68.
GREVILLE, C. C.,
  Johnson and Garrick, i. 216, n. 3;
    and Fox, iv. 167, n. 1;
  'public dinner' at Lambeth, iv. 367, n. 3.
GREVILLE, Richard Fulke, <i>Maxims and Characters</i>, iv. 304;
  account of him, ib., n. 4;
  mentioned, iv. 1, n. 1.
GREY, first Earl, iii. 424, n. 4.
GREY, Dr. Richard, iii. 318.
GREY, Stephen, ii. 26.
GREY, Dr. Zachary, i. 444, n. 1; iii. 318; v. 225, n. 3.
GRIEF, alleviated by recording recollections of the dead, i. 212;
  digested, to be, not diverted, iii. 28;
  effect of business engagements on it, ii. 470;
  Johnson's advice as to dealing with it, iii. 136; iv. 100, 142;
  not retained long by a sound mind, iii. 136;
  wears away soon, iii. 136.
  See SORROW.
GRIERSON, Mr. and Mrs., ii. 116.
GRIFFITHS, Ralph, the publisher, his evidence worthless, iii. 30, n. 1;
  war with Smollett, iii. 32, n. 2.
GRIFFITHS, ——, of Bryn o dol, v. 449.
GRIFFITHS, ——, of Kefnamwycllh, v. 452.
GRIMM, Baron, <i>Candide</i>, i. 342;
  Mme, du Boccage, iv. 331, n. 1.
GRIMSTON, Viscount, iv. 80, n. 1.
<i>Grongar Hill</i>, iv. 307.
GRONOVII, v. 376.
GROSVENOR, Lord, v. 458, n. 5.
GROTIUS, corporal punishment, on, ii. 157, n. 1;
  Christian evidences, on, i. 398, 454;
  <i>De Satisfactione Christi</i>, v. 89;
  Isaac de Groot his descendant, iii. 125;
  practised as a lawyer, ii. 430;
  quoted in Lauder's fraud, i. 229.
GROVE, Rev. Henry, papers in the <i>Spectator</i>, iii. 33;
  read by Baretti, iv. 32.
<i>Grove, The</i>, iv. 23, n. 3.
<i>Grub Street</i>, defined, i. 296.
GUADALOUPE, i. 367, 368, n. 1.
GUALTIER, Philip, iv. 181, n. 3.
<i>Guarded</i> bed-curtains, v. 433, n. 3.
<i>Guardian, The</i>, on public judgment, i. 200, n. 2;
  end of its publication, i. 201, n. 3.
GUARDIANS FOR CHILDREN, iii. 400.
GUARDS, The, Boswell's fondness for them, i. 400, n. 1;
  afraid of the juries, iii. 46.
GUARINI, <i>Pastor Fido</i>, iii. 346.
GUESSING, iii. 356.
<i>Guide-Books</i>, common in Italy, v. 61.
GUILLERAGUES, M. de, i. 90, n. 1.
GUILTY, ten, should escape, rather than one innocent suffer, iv. 251.
GUIMENÉ, Princess of, ii. 394.
GULOSITY, i. 468.
GUNNING, the Misses, v. 353, n. 1, 359, n. 2.
GUNPOWDER, iii. 361; v. 124.
GUNTHWAIT, ii. 169.
<i>Gustavus Adolphus, History of</i>, iv. 78.
<i>Gustavus Vasa</i>, i. 140.
GUTHRIE, William, account of him, i. 116, 117, n. 2;
  Johnson's character of him, ii. 52;
  <i>Apotheosis of Milton</i>, i. 140;
  Debates, i. 116, 118;
  Duhalde's <i>China</i>, translates, iv. 30;
  pensioned, i. 117;
  Scotticisms, i. 118, n. 1.
GUYON, _Dissertation on the Amazons, i. 150.
GWYN. Colonel, i. 414, n. 1.
GWYNN, John, the architect, account of him, v. 454, n. 2;
  buildings designed by him, ii. 438, n. 3;
  defence of architecture, ii. 439;
  happy reply, ii. 440;
  Johnson's advocacy of him, i. 351;
  letter in his behalf, v. 454, n. 2;
  <i>London and Westminster Improved</i>, ii. 25;
  Oxford post-coach, in the, ii. 438; iii. 129;
  <i>Thoughts on the Coronation of George III</i>, i. 361.
GWYNNE, Nell, i. 248, n. 2.</p>

<h3>H.</h3>

<p><i>Habeas Corpus</i>, ii. 73.<br/>

<i>Habeas Corpus Bill</i> of 1758, iii. 233, n. 1.<br/>

HABERDASHERS' COMPANY, i. 132, n. 1.<br/>

HABITATIONS, attachment to, ii. 103.<br/>

HABITS, early, force of, ii. 366.<br/>

HACKMAN, Rev. Mr., Boswell attends his trial, iii. 383;<br/>

  and execution, iii. 384, n. 1;<br/>

  altercation about him, iii. 384-5;<br/>

  described in <i>Love and Madness</i>, iv. 187, n. 1.<br/>

HADDINGTON, seventh Earl of, iii. 133.<br/>

HADDO, Professor, v. 64.<br/>

HADDOCKS, dried, v. 110.<br/>

<i>Hadoni exequioe</i>, iv. 159, n. 1.<br/>

HAGLEY, described by Walpole, v. 78, n. 3, 456, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson visits it, v. 456-7.<br/>

HAGUE, v. 25, n. 2.<br/>

HAILES, Lord (Sir David Dalrymple),<br/>

  account of him, i. 432; v. 48;<br/>

  <i>Annals of Scotland</i>, a new mode of history, ii. 383;<br/>

    accuracy, ii. 421;<br/>

    a book of great labour, iii. 372;<br/>

    exact, but dry, iii. 404;<br/>

    praised by Gibbon, ib., n. 3;<br/>

    revised by Johnson, ii. 278-9, 283-4, 287, 293. 333, 379-80,<br/>

383-4, 387, 411-12, 421; iii. 120, 216, 219, 360;<br/>

    praised by him, iii. 58;<br/>

  Boswell, letters to, i. 432; v. 406;<br/>

  <i>Catalogue of the Lords of Session</i>, v. 213;<br/>

  Chesterfield's 'respectable Hottentot,' on, i. 267;<br/>

  consulted on the entail of Auchinleck, ii. 415, 418, 420-22;<br/>

  critical sagacity, ii. 201; v. 48;<br/>

  Elgin Cathedral, account of, v. 114;<br/>

  Inch Keith, account of, v. 55;<br/>

  Johnson, introduced to, v. 48;<br/>

    asks, to write a character of Bruce, ii. 386-7;<br/>

    compares, with Swift, i. 433;<br/>

    is not convinced by his <i>Suasorium</i>, iii. 91;<br/>

    records  a talk with him, v. 399;<br/>

    sends him anecdotes for his <i>Lives</i>, iii. 396-7;<br/>

    drinks a bumper to him, i. 451;<br/>

    love for him, ii. 293;<br/>

  Knight, the negro's case, iii. 216, 219;<br/>

  <i>La crédulité des Incrédules</i>, v. 332;<br/>

  <i>Lactantius</i>, edits, iii. 133;<br/>

  modernizes John Hales's language, iv. 315;<br/>

  <i>Ossian</i>, faith in, ii. 295;<br/>

  Percy, resemblance to, iii. 278;<br/>

  Prior, censures, iii. 192;<br/>

  <i>Remarks on the History of Scotland</i>, v. 38-9;<br/>

  <i>Sacred Poems</i>, iii. 192;<br/>

  Stuarts, unfair to the, v. 255;<br/>

  <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>, corrects the, v. 49;<br/>

  <i>Walton's Lives</i>, proposal to edit, ii. 279, 283, 285, 445;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 294; iii. 102, 129, 155; iv. 157, 216, 232, 241; v. 394.<br/>

HAIR, growth of the, iii. 398, n. 3.<br/>

HAKEWILL, Rev. George, i. 219.<br/>

HALL, Sir Matthew, devoted to his office, ii. 344;<br/>

  knowledge varied, ii. 158;<br/>

  <i>Life</i> by Burnet, iv. 311;<br/>

  <i>Primitive Origination of Mankind</i>, i. 188, n. 4;<br/>

  rules of health and study, iv. 310;<br/>

  sentenced witches to death, v. 45, n. 5.<br/>

HALES, John, of Eton, iv. 315.<br/>

HALES, Stephen, <i>On Distilling Sea-Water</i>, i. 309;<br/>

  <i>Statical Essays</i>, v. 247, n. 1.<br/>

HALIFAX, Dr., ii. 97, n. 1.<br/>

HALKET, Elizabeth, ii. 91, n. 2.<br/>

HALL, Dr., Master of Pembroke College, iv. 298, n. 2.<br/>

HALL, General, iii. 361, 362, n. 1.<br/>

HALL, John, the engraver, iii. 111; iv. 421, n. 2.<br/>

HALL, Mrs., account of her, iv. 92;<br/>

  Johnson turns Captain Macheath, iv. 95;<br/>

  talks of the resurrection, iv. 93.<br/>

HALL, Rev. Robert,<br/>

  influenced by a metaphysical tailor, iv. 187, n. 2;<br/>

  studied at Aberdeen, v. 85, n. 2.<br/>

HALL, Rev. Westley (Wesley's brother-in-law), iv. 92, n. 3.<br/>

HALL, ——, v. 98.<br/>

HALLAM, Henry, ii. 210, n. 3.<br/>

HALLAM, Henry, the younger, ii. 94, n. 2.<br/>

HALLE, University of, i. 148, n. 1.<br/>

HALLS, fire-place in the middle, i. 273;<br/>

  in squires' houses, v. 60.<br/>

HALSEY, Edmund, i. 491, n. 1.<br/>

HAM, posterity of, i. 401.<br/>

HAMILTON, Archibald, the printer, ii. 226.<br/>

HAMILTON, Captain, iv. 295, n. 5.<br/>

HAMILTON, sixth Duke of, v. 359. n. 2.<br/>

HAMILTON, eighth Duke of, ii. 50, n. 4; ii. 219; v. 43, 353, n. 1.<br/>

HAMILTON, Gavin, ii. 270.<br/>

HAMILTON, Lady Betty, v. 354, 358.<br/>

HAMILTON, Sir William, member of the Literary Club, i. 479.<br/>

HAMILTON, William, of Bangour,<br/>

  Johnson talks slightingly of him, iii. 150-1;<br/>

  verses on Holyrood, v. 43;<br/>

  to the Countess of Eglintoune, v. 374, n. 3.<br/>

HAMILTON, William, of Sundrum, v. 38.<br/>

HAMILTON, William Gerard,<br/>

  Boswell's  <i>Johnson</i>, pays for a cancel in, i. 520;<br/>

  Burke, engagement and rupture with, i. 519;<br/>

    ranks very high, iv. 27, n. 1;<br/>

  character by H. Walpole and Miss Burney, i. 520;<br/>

  'eminent friend,' an, iv. 280, n. 2;<br/>

  Jenyns's character, iii. 289, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson accompanied him to the street-door, i. 490;<br/>

    arguing on the wrong side, iv. 111, n. 2;<br/>

    bequest to him, iv. 402, n. 2;<br/>

    complaint of the Ministry, ii. 317;<br/>

    death makes a chasm, iv. 420;<br/>

    engaging in politics with him, i. 489, 518-20;<br/>

    'envied but one thing,' he had said, iv. 112;<br/>

    esteem for him, i. 489;<br/>

      long intimacy, ii. 317;<br/>

      as a fox-hunter, i. 446, n. 1;<br/>

    generous offer to, iv. 245, 363, n. 1;<br/>

    letters to him, iv. 245, 363;<br/>

    pension, ii. 317;<br/>

    on public speaking, ii. 139;<br/>

  <i>Junius</i>, suspected to be, iii. 376, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Parliamentary Logick</i>, i. 518;<br/>

  satisfactory coxcomb, describes a, iii. 245, n. 1;<br/>

  'Single-speech,' i. 489, n, 4;<br/>

  Warton, Dr., letter to, i. 519;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 1, n. 1, 159, n. 3, 344.<br/>

HAMILTON and BALFOUR, booksellers, iii. 334, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Hamlet, an Essay on the Character of</i>, iv. 25, n. 4;<br/>

   rescued from rubbish, ii. 85, n. 7, 204, n. 3.<br/>

HAMMOND, Dr. Henry, iii. 58.<br/>

HAMMOND, James,<br/>

  <i>Life</i>, by Johnson, iii. 30, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Love Elegies</i>, iv. 17; v. 268.<br/>

HAMPDEN, Dr., Bishop of Hereford, iv. 323, n. 3.<br/>

HAMPSTEAD, Mrs. Johnson's lodgings, i. 192, 238;<br/>

  Johnson composes most of <i>The Vanity of Human Wishes</i> there, i. 192;<br/>

  takes an airing to it, iv. 232;<br/>

  mentioned, v. 223.<br/>

HAMPTON, James, <i>Translation of Polybius</i>, i. 309.<br/>

HAMPTON COURT,<br/>

  Johnson's application for a residence in it, iii. 34, n. 4;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 400, n. 2.<br/>

HANDASYD, General, ii. 218, n. 1.<br/>

HANDEL,<br/>

  musical meeting in his honour, iv. 283;<br/>

  his poet, v. 350, n. 1.<br/>

HANMER, Sir Thomas,<br/>

  epitaphs on him, i. 177; ii. 25;<br/>

  Hervey's <i>Letter to Sir Thomas Hanmer</i>, ii. 32, n. 1, 33, n. 2;<br/>

  Shakespeare, edits, i. 175, 178; v. 244, n. 2.<br/>

HANNIBAL, iii. 40.<br/>

HANOVER, House of,<br/>

  Johnson attacks it, i. 141:<br/>

    asserts its unpopularity, iii. 155;<br/>

    calls it <i>isolée</i>, iv. 165;<br/>

    says that it is weak because unpopular, v. 271;<br/>

  oaths as to the disputed right, ii. 220;<br/>

  pleasure of cursing it, i. 429;<br/>

  right to the throne, v. 202-4;<br/>

  unpopular at Oxford, i. 72, n. 3 (see under OXFORD, Jacobite);<br/>

    becomes generally popular, iv. 171, n. 1<br/>

      (see under GEORGE III, unpopularity).<br/>

HANOVER RAT, ii. 455.<br/>

HANWAY, Jonas,<br/>

  <i>Eight Days' Journey</i>, i. 309; ii. 122;<br/>

  <i>Essay on Tea</i>, i. 309. 313-4, 348, n. 3; iii. 264, n. 4; v. 23;<br/>

  Johnson's rejoinder, i. 314.<br/>

HAPPINESS,<br/>

  attained by studying little things, i. 433, 440; iii. 165;<br/>

  business of a wise man, iii. 135;<br/>

  cannot be found in this life, v. 180;<br/>

  counterfeited, ii. 169, n. 3;<br/>

  cultivated,  to be, iii. 164;<br/>

  experience shows that men are less happy, iii. 237;<br/>

  hope the chief part of it, i. 234, n. 2; ii. 351;<br/>

  Hume's notion, ii. 9; iii. 288;<br/>

  inn, produced most by a good, ii. 452;<br/>

  its throne a tavern chair, ib., n. 1;<br/>

  one solid basis of it, iii. 363;<br/>

  Pantheon, at the, ii. 169;<br/>

  pleasure, compared with, iii. 246;<br/>

  present time never happy but when a man is drunk, ii. 350, 435, n. 7;<br/>

iii. 5;<br/>

    or when he forgets himself, iii. 53;<br/>

  public matters, little affected by, ii. 60, n. 4, 170;<br/>

  schoolboys, happiness of, i. 451;<br/>

  struggles for it, iii. 199;<br/>

  Swift, defined by, ii. 351, n. 1;<br/>

  virtue, not the certain result of, i. 389, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Happy Life, The</i>, ii. 25.<br/>

HARCOURT, Lord Chancellor, i. 75, n. 3.<br/>

HARCOURT, Lord, iii. 426, n. 3.<br/>

HARDCASTLE, Mrs., in <i>She Stoops to Conquer</i>, i. 213, n. 5.<br/>

HARDING, ——, a painter, iv. 421, n. 2.<br/>

HARDINGE, first Viscount, ii. 183, n. 1.<br/>

HARDWICKE, Lord Chancellor,<br/>

  <i>Dirleton's Doubts</i>, on, iii. 205;<br/>

  Dr. Foster  becomes popular through him, iv. 9, n. 5;<br/>

  prime minister, on the office of a, ii. 355, n. 2;<br/>

  Radcliffe's trial, i. 180, n. 2;<br/>

  Spectator, paper in the, iii. 34;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 157, n. 3.<br/>

HARDWICKE, second Lord, i. 260, n. 3.<br/>

HARDYKNUTE, ii. 91.<br/>

HARE, James, iii. 388, n. 3.<br/>

HARE, W., the murderer, v. 227, n. 4.<br/>

HARGRAVE, ——, the barrister, iii. 87, n. 3.<br/>

HARINGTON, Dr., iv. 180.<br/>

HARINGTON, Sir John, iv. 180, n. 3; 420, n. 3.<br/>

HARLEIAN Library and Catalogue, i. 153, 158.<br/>

<i>Harleian Miscellany, Preface to the</i>, i. 175.<br/>

HARRINGTON, Countess of, iii. 141.<br/>

HARRIS, James (Hermes Harris),<br/>

  account of him, ii. 225, n. 2;<br/>

  a coxcomb, v. 377;<br/>

  <i>Hermes or Philological Inquiries</i>, iii. 115, 245, 258; v. 377;<br/>

  Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>, praises, iii. 115;<br/>

    talk with, iii. 256-9;<br/>

  pleasantry, his sense of, v. 378, n. 2;<br/>

  scholar and prig, iii. 245;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 365.<br/>

HARRIS, Thomas, of Covent Garden Theatre, iii. 114.<br/>

HARRISON, Rev. Cornelius, iv. 401, n. 3.<br/>

HARRISON, Elizabeth, <i>Miscellanies</i>, i. 309, 312.<br/>

HARRISON, John, the inventor of the chronometer, i. 301, n. 3.<br/>

HARRISON, ——, iv. 222, n. 2.<br/>

HARROGATE, i. 287, n. 3; iii. 45, n. 1.<br/>

HARRY, Miss Jane, iii. 298, n. 2.<br/>

HARTE, Dr. Walter,<br/>

  companionable and a scholar, ii. 120;<br/>

  <i>Essays on Husbandry</i>, iv. 78;<br/>

  <i>History of Gustavus Adolphus</i>, ii. 120; iv. 78;<br/>

  Johnson and the screen, i. 163, n. 1;<br/>

  tutor to Eliot and Stanhope, iv. 78, 333.<br/>

HARTLEBURY, v. 455.<br/>

HARVEST OF 1777, iii. 226, n. 2;<br/>

   of 1775, iii. 313, n. 3.<br/>

HARVEY. See HERVEY.<br/>

HARWICH, i. 471;<br/>

  stage-coach, 465.<br/>

HARWOOD, Dr. Edward,<br/>

  <i>Liberal Translation of the New Testament</i>, iii. 38.<br/>

HASLERIG, Sir Arthur, ii. 118.<br/>

HASTIE, a Scotch schoolmaster,<br/>

  his case, ii. 144, 146, 156, 157;<br/>

  Johnson's argument for him, ii. 183;<br/>

  Mansfield's speech, ii. 186;<br/>

  had his deserts, ii. 202.<br/>

HASTINGS, Warren,<br/>

  Boswell, letter to, iv. 66;<br/>

  charges against him, iv. 213;<br/>

  Johnson, letters from, iii. 455; iv. 66, 68-70;<br/>

  Macaulay on his answer to Johnson, iv. 70, n. 2;<br/>

  scheme about Oxford and Persian literature, iv. 68, n. 2;<br/>

  trial, iv. 66, n. 1;<br/>

  Westminster School, at, i. 395, n. 2.<br/>

HATE, steadier than love, iii. 150.<br/>

HATSEL, Mrs., iv. 159, n. 3.<br/>

HATTER, anecdote of a, ii. 287, n. 2.<br/>

HAVANNAH EXPEDITION, i. 191, n. 5, 242, n. 1, 382.<br/>

HAWES, L., i. 183, n. 1.<br/>

HAWKESBURY, Lord. See JENKINSON, Charles.<br/>

HAWKESTONE, v. 433-4.<br/>

HAWKESWORTH, Dr. John, edits the <i>Adventurer</i>, i. 234;<br/>

  Cook's Voyages, edits, ii. 247; iii. 7;<br/>

    payment for it, i. 341, n. 4; ii. 247, n. 5;<br/>

    passage against a particular providence, v. 282;<br/>

  Courtenay's lines on him, i. 223;<br/>

  death, causes of his, v. 282, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Debates</i>, continues the, i. 512;<br/>

  Ivy Lane Club, member of the, iv. 436;<br/>

  Johnson's imitator, i. 233, 252; ii. 216;<br/>

    tribute to him, i. 190, n. 3;<br/>

  Psalmanazar, anecdote of, iii. 443;<br/>

  spoilt by success, i. 253, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Swift, Life of</i>, i. 190, n. 3; ii. 319, n. 1;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 241, 242; ii. 118.<br/>

HAWKINS, Sir John, account of him, i. 27-8;<br/>

  Addison's style, i. 224, n. 1;<br/>

  'Attorney, an,' i. 190;<br/>

  Barber, attacks, iv. 370, 402, n. 2; 440;<br/>

  Boswell attacks him indirectly, i. 226, n. 3;<br/>

    slights, i. 28, n. 1, 190, n. 4;<br/>

  'bulky tome,' his, ii. 452, n. 1;<br/>

  Burke, rudeness, to, i. 480;<br/>

    ill-will towards, ii. 450;<br/>

  Cave, Edward, i. 113, n. 1;<br/>

  Dodd, Dr., iii. I20, n. 2;<br/>

  English lexicographers, i. 186;<br/>

  gentility, on, i. 162, n. 3;<br/>

  Goldsmith at the Club, i. 480, n. 1;<br/>

  Hector's notes of Johnson, iv. 375;<br/>

  <i>History of Music</i>, v. 72;<br/>

  Hogarth's physicians, iii. 288, n. 4;<br/>

  inaccuracy, his general, i. 27, n. 1; iii. 229; iv.<br/>

   327, n. 5, 371;<br/>

  instances of it—Addison's <i>notanda</i>, i. 204;<br/>

    Essex Head Club, iv. 254, 437;<br/>

  <i>ignorance</i> for <i>arrogance</i>, iv. 138, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Irene</i>, reception of, i. 197, n. 5;<br/>

  Johnson's <i>Adversaria</i>, i. 208, n. 1;<br/>

    'enmity' to Milton, i. 230;<br/>

    fear of death, iv. 395;<br/>

    fondness for his wife, i. 234;<br/>

    and Heely, ii. 31, n. 1;<br/>

    loan of books, iv. 371, n. 2;<br/>

    and Millar, i. 287, n. 2;<br/>

    mother's death, i. 339, n. 2;<br/>

    operating on himself, iv. 399, n. 6, 418, n. 1;<br/>

    'ostentatious bounty to negroes,' iv. 402, n. 2;<br/>

    warrants against, i. 141;<br/>

    wife's apparition, i. 240;<br/>

    will, iv. 370;<br/>

    Literary Club, i. 479-80;<br/>

    <i>Rasselas</i>, i. 341;<br/>

    <i>Review of Burke's Sublime and Beautiful</i>, i. 310;<br/>

    <i>Vicar of Wakefield</i>, sale of the copy of the, i. 415;<br/>

  Ivy Lane Club, iv. 253;<br/>

  Johnson's apologies, iv. 321, n. 1;<br/>

    bequest to him, iv. 402, n. 2;<br/>

    executors, one of, iv. 402, n. 2;<br/>

    funeral, iv. 420, n. 1;<br/>

    house in Johnson's Court, ii. 5, n. 1;<br/>

    humour, ii. 262, n. 2;<br/>

    letters to him, iv. 435;<br/>

    <i>London</i> and Savage, i. 125, n. 4;<br/>

    mode of eating, i. 468, n. 2;<br/>

    not a stayed, orderly man, iv. 371, n. 2;<br/>

    praise of a tavern chair, ii. 452, n. 1;<br/>

    quickness to see good in others, i. 161, n. 2;<br/>

    readiness to forgive injuries, iv. 349, n. 2;<br/>

    said to have slandered, iv. 420, n. 1;<br/>

    separation from his wife, i. 163, n. 2;<br/>

    sinking into indolence, iii. 98, n. 1;<br/>

    title of Doctor, i. 488, n. 3;<br/>

    will, iv. 402;<br/>

    <i>Works</i>, edits, i. 190, n. 4;<br/>

    writing for money, iii. 19, n. 3;<br/>

  knighted, i. 190, n. 4;<br/>

  Literary Club, account of the, i. 478, n. 2, 479;<br/>

  Pitt and Pulteney, oratory of, i. 152;<br/>

  pockets Johnson's <i>Diary</i>, iv. 406, n. 1;<br/>

  Porson, satirised by, ii. 57, n. 5; iv. 370, n. 5, 406, n. 1;<br/>

  'rigmarole,' his, i. 351, n. 1;<br/>

  Thrale's, Mrs., second marriage, iv. 339;<br/>

  unclubable, i. 27, n. 2, 480, n. 1; iv. 254, n. 2.<br/>

HAWKINS, Miss,<br/>

  'Boswell, Mr. James,' i. 190, n. 4;<br/>

  Burke's estimate of his son, iv. 219, n. 3;<br/>

  Hawkins's attack on the Essex Head Club, iv. 438.<br/>

HAWKINS, Rev. Professor William, member of Pembroke College, i. 75;<br/>

  quarrel with Garrick, ib., n. 2; iii. 259.<br/>

HAWKINS, ——, under-master of Lichfield School, i. 43.<br/>

HAWTHORNDEN. See DRUMMOND, William.<br/>

HAY, Lord, v. 105.<br/>

HAY, Lord Charles,<br/>

  at the Battle of Fontenoy, iii. 8, n. 3;<br/>

  his courtmartial, iii. 9.<br/>

HAY, Sir George, i. 349.<br/>

HAY, Dr., i. 349, 351, n. 1.<br/>

HAY, John, v. 131, 137, 144.<br/>

HAY, William, a translation of <i>Martial</i>, v. 368.<br/>

HAYES, Rev. Mr., iii. 181.<br/>

HAYLEY, William,<br/>

  correspondence with Miss Seward, iv. 331, n. 2;<br/>

  dedication to Romney, iii. 43, n. 4.<br/>

HAYMAN, Francis, i. 263, n. 3.<br/>

HAYWARD, Abraham, <i>Thraliana</i>, iv. 343, n. 4.<br/>

HAZLITT, William,<br/>

  Baxter at Kidderminster, iv. 226, n. 2;<br/>

  Dr. Foster's popularity, iv. 9, n. 5;<br/>

  grieves at the defeat of Napoleon, iv. 278, n. 3.<br/>

  See under NORTHCOTE,<i>Conversations of Northcote</i>.<br/>

HEALE, iv. 234-9.<br/>

HEALTH, rules to restore it, iv. 153.<br/>

<i>Heard</i>, Johnson's pronunciation of, iii. 197.<br/>

HEARNE, Thomas,<br/>

  Duke of Brunwick's accession-day, i. 72, n. 3;<br/>

  Leland's <i>Itinerary</i>, v. 445, n. 3;<br/>

  Pembroke College Chapel, i. 59, n. 1;<br/>

  Psalmanazar at Oxford, iii. 449.<br/>

HEATH, Dr., iv. 73.<br/>

HEATH, James, the engraver, iv. 421, n. 2.<br/>

HEAVEN, degrees of happiness in it, iii. 288.<br/>

  See FUTURE STATE.<br/>

HE-BEAR AND SHE-BEAR, iv. 113, n. 2.<br/>

HEBERDEN, Dr.,<br/>

  account of him, iv. 228, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson, attends, iv. 230-1, 260, n. 2, 262;<br/>

    bequest to him, iv. 402, n. 2;<br/>

  Markland, assists, iv. 161, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>ultimus Romanorum</i>, iv. 399, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>timidorum timidissimus</i>, iv. 399, n, 6;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 311; iv. 353-4, 355, n. 1.<br/>

HEBREW, Leibnitz traces all languages  up to it, ii. 156.<br/>

HEBRIDES. See under BOSWELL, <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides;<br/>

Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland</i>; and SCOTLAND, Highlands.<br/>

HECTOR, Edmund,<br/>

  Birmingham, his house in, ii. 456, n. 2;<br/>

  Boswell and Johnson visit him in 1776, ii. 456, 457; 459-461;<br/>

  Johnson's chastity, i. 164;<br/>

    early life, gives Boswell particulars of, ii. 459; iv. 375, n. 2;<br/>

    early verses, i. 157, n. 5;<br/>

    friendship for him, iv. 135, 147, 270;<br/>

    last visit to him, iv. 375;<br/>

    letters to him: see under JOHNSON, letters;<br/>

    will, not in, iv. 402, n. 2;<br/>

  sister, his, Mrs. Careless, ii. 459.<br/>

HEELY, Mr. and Mrs., ii. 30-1; iv. 370;<br/>

  Johnson's letter to Heely, iv. 371.<br/>

<i>Heinous</i>, ii. 172.<br/>

HEIRS AT LAW, right, their, ii. 432.<br/>

HEIRS GENERAL, ii. 414.<br/>

HELL,<br/>

  Johnson's dread of it, iv. 299;<br/>

  its pavement of good intentions, ii. 360;<br/>

  of infants' skulls, iv. 226, n. 2;<br/>

  subsists by truth, iii. 293.<br/>

HELMET, hung out on a tower, iii. 273.<br/>

HELOT, the drunken, iii. 379.<br/>

HELVETIUS,<br/>

  advises Montesquieu to suppress his <i>Esprit des Lois</i>, v. 42, n. 1;<br/>

  Warburton 'would have <i>worked</i> him,' iv. 261, n. 3.<br/>

HELVOETSLUYS, i. 471.<br/>

<i>Hemisphere</i>, ii. 81.<br/>

HÉNAULT, ii. 383, n. i, 412, 421.<br/>

HENDERSON, John, the actor,<br/>

  his mimicry of Johnson not correct, ii. 326, n. 5;<br/>

  visits him, iv. 244, n. 2.<br/>

HENDERSON, John (of Pembroke College), account of him, iv. 298-9;<br/>

  Johnson and the nonjurors, iv. 286, n. 3;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 151, n. 2.<br/>

HENLEY-IN-ARDEN, ii. 452, n. 2, 456.<br/>

HENLEY-ON-THAMES, v. 454, n. 2.<br/>

HENN, Mr., i. 132, n. 1.<br/>

HENRY II. gives Langton a grant of free-warren, i. 248;<br/>

  <i>History</i> of him by Lyttelton, ii. 38.<br/>

<i>Henry V</i>, Johnson proposes to act it in Versailles, ii. 395, n. 2.<br/>

HENRY VIII. threatens the House of Commons, iii. 408.<br/>

HENRY IV. of France, Johnson censures his epitaph, iv. 85, n. I.<br/>

HENRY, Prince, of Portugal,<br/>

  happy for mankind had he never been born, iv. 250.<br/>

HENRY, Robert, <i>History of Great Britain</i>, iii. 333;<br/>

  sale maliciously injured, in. 334, n. 1;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 55, n. 1.<br/>

HENS feeding their young, iv. 210.<br/>

HEPHAESTION, iv. 274.<br/>

HERALD'S OFFICE, i. 255.<br/>

HERALDRY, i. 492.<br/>

HERBERT, George, 'Hell is full of good meanings,' ii. 360, n. 1.<br/>

HERCULES, his shirt, iii. 358;<br/>

  Johnson, the Hercules who strangled serpents, ii. 260;<br/>

  'You, and I and Hercules,' iv. 45, n. 3.<br/>

HEREDITARY OCCUPATIONS, v. 120.<br/>

HEREDITARY TENURES, ii. 421.<br/>

<i>Hermes, or a Philosophical Inquiry concerning Universal Grammar</i>,<br/>

ii. 225, n. 2.<br/>

HERMETICK PHILOSOPHY. See <i>Hermippus Redivivus</i>.<br/>

<i>Hermippus Redivivus</i>, i. 417; ii. 427, n. 4.<br/>

<i>Hermit</i>. See under BEATTIE and PARNELL.<br/>

<i>Hermit of Teneriffe</i>. See <i>Theodore the Hermit</i>.<br/>

HERMITS, v. 62.<br/>

HERNE, Elizabeth, iv. 402, n. 2, 439.<br/>

HERODOTUS, Egyptian mummies, iv. 125, n. 4.<br/>

<i>Heroic Epistle</i>. See MASON, W.<br/>

HERTFORD, first Earl of,<br/>

  Cock-lane ghost, goes to hear the, i. 407, n. 1;<br/>

  Hume, gets a pension for, ii. 317, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson, correspondence with, iii. 34, n. 4.<br/>

HERTFORD, Lady, i. 173, n. 3; iii. 139, n. 4.<br/>

HERVEY, Hon. Henry, 'Harry Hervey,' i. 106;<br/>

  Johnson's love for him, i. 106;<br/>

  intimacy with his family, i, 194;<br/>

  story of Johnson's ingratitude, iii. 195.<br/>

HERVEY, Rev. James,<br/>

  <i>Meditations</i>, v. 351;<br/>

    parodied by Johnson, v. 352.<br/>

HERVEY, Hon. Thomas, Beauclerk's story of him and Johnson, ii. 32;<br/>

  Johnson, payment to, ii. 33;<br/>

  separation from his wife, ii. 32, 33, n. 2;<br/>

  vicious and genteel, ii. 341.<br/>

HERVEY, Mrs., iii. 244, n. 2.<br/>

HERVEY, Miss, iii. 195, n. 1.<br/>

HERVEY, Miss E., iii. 435; n. 4.<br/>

HESIOD, <i>Pasoris Lexicon</i>, iii. 407;<br/>

  quoted, v. 63.<br/>

HESKETH, Lady, iii. 36, n. 3.<br/>

HESSE, Landgrave of, v. 217.<br/>

HETHERINGTON'S CHARITY, ii. 286.<br/>

HEYDON, John, iv. 402, n. 2.<br/>

HEYWOOD, i. 84, n. 2.<br/>

HICKES, Rev. Dr., account of him, v. 357, n. 4;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 287.<br/>

HICKY, Thomas, ii. 340.<br/>

HIERARCHY, English,<br/>

  Johnson's reverence for it, iv. 75, 197, 274; v. 61;<br/>

  its theory and practice, iii. 138.<br/>

<i>Hierocles, Jests of</i>, i. l50; v. 308, n. 1.<br/>

HIGGINS, Dr., iii. 354, 386.<br/>

<i>High</i>, Johnson's use of the word, iii. 118, n. 3.<br/>

HIGH DUTCH, resemblance to English, iii. 235.<br/>

<i>High Life below Stairs</i>, iv. 7.<br/>

HIGHWAYMEN,<br/>

  evidence of H. Walpole, Wesley, and Baretti as to their frequency,<br/>

iii. 239, n. 1;<br/>

  Gay their Orpheus, ii. 367, n. 1;<br/>

  question of shooting them, iii. 239, 240, n. 1.<br/>

HILL, Dr. Sir John,<br/>

  account of him, ii. 38, n. 2, 39, n. 2;<br/>

  wrote <i>Mrs. Glasses Cookery</i>, iii. 285;<br/>

  in the <i>Heroic Epistle</i>, iv. 113, n. 3.<br/>

HILL, Joseph (Cowper's friend), i. 395, n. 2.<br/>

HILL, Miss, of Hawkestone, v. 433-4.<br/>

HILL, Professor, of St. Andrews, v. 64-5.<br/>

HILL, Sir Rowland, of Hawkestone, v. 433.<br/>

HILL, Thomas Wright, v. 455, n. 1.<br/>

HINCHCLIFFE, John, Bishop of Peterborough,<br/>

  member of the Literary Club, i. 479;<br/>

  hated Whiggism, iii. 422.<br/>

HINCHINBROOK, iii. 383, n. 3.<br/>

HINCHMAN, ——, iv. 402, n. 2.<br/>

HINDOOS, iv. 12, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Histoire de Pascal Paoli</i>, ii. 3, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Historia Studiorum</i>, Johnson's, iii. 321.<br/>

HISTORIAN,<br/>

  great abilities not needed, i. 424;<br/>

  inferiority of English, i. 100, n. 1; ii. 236, n. 2;<br/>

  licence allowed, i. 355.<br/>

HISTORY,<br/>

  almanac, no better than an, ii. 366;<br/>

  authentic, little, ii. 365;<br/>

  Bolingbroke's caution about reading it, ii. 213, n. 3;<br/>

  Bolingbroke, Burke, and Fox on it, ii. 366, n. 1;<br/>

  character and motives generally unknown, ii. 79; iii. 404;<br/>

  colouring and philosophy conjecture, ii. 365;<br/>

  Johnson's indifference to general history, iii. 206, n. 1;<br/>

    recommendation of many histories, iv. 312, n. 1;<br/>

  manners and common life, of, iii. 333; v. 79;<br/>

  oral at first, v. 393;<br/>

  'painted form the taste of this age,' iii. 58;<br/>

  records only lately consulted, i. 117; v. 220;<br/>

  spirit contrary to minute exactness, i. 155;<br/>

  shallow stream of thought in it, ii. 195;<br/>

  unsupported by contemporary evidence, v. 403.<br/>

<i>History of the Council of Trent</i>, i. 107.<br/>

<i>History of England</i>, in Italian. See MARTINELLI.<br/>

<i>History of John Bull</i>, i. 452, n. 2;<br/>

  written by Arbuthnot, i. 452, n. 2;<br/>

  quoted by Johnson, ii. 235, n. 1.<br/>

<i>History of the War</i>, projected, i. 354.<br/>

<i>Historyes of Troye</i>, v. 459, n. 2.<br/>

HITCH, Charles, i. 183.<br/>

HOADLEY, Archbishop, i. 318, n. 4.<br/>

HOADLEY, Dr. Benjamin, <i>Suspicious Husband, The</i>, ii. 50, n. 2.<br/>

HOADLEY, Dr. John, letter to Garrick, ii. 69, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Hob in the Well</i>, ii. 465.<br/>

HOBBES, Thomas,<br/>

  Bathurst's verses to him, iv. 402, n. 2;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 448.<br/>

HOCKLEY-IN-THE-HOLE, iii. 134, n. 1; 454.<br/>

HODGE, the cat, iv. 197.<br/>

HODGES, Dr., ii. 341, n. 3.<br/>

HOG, William, i. 229.<br/>

HOGARTH, William,<br/>

  Garrick's acting, describes, iii. 35, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson's belief, describes, i. 147, n. 2;<br/>

    conversation, ib.;<br/>

    finds more like David than Solomon, iii. 229, n. 3;<br/>

      like his <i>Idle Apprentice</i>, i. 250;<br/>

    takes for an idiot, i. 146;<br/>

  <i>Modern Midnight Conversation</i>, iii. 348;<br/>

  partisan of George II, i. 146;<br/>

  physicians, his, iii. 288, n. 4;<br/>

  prints, his, at Slains Castle, v. 102;<br/>

    at Streatham, iii. 348;<br/>

  Wilkes, print of, v. 186.<br/>

HOGG, James, <i>Jacobite Relics</i>, v. 142, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Hogshead</i> of sense, v. 341.<br/>

HOLBACH, Baron,<br/>

  anecdote of Hume and seventeen Atheists, ii. 8, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Système de la Nature</i>, v. 47, n. 4.<br/>

HOLBROOK, ——, Usher at Lichfield School, i. 44.<br/>

HOLDER, ——, an apothecary, iv. 137, 144, 402, n. 2.<br/>

HOLIDAYS OF THE CHURCH, ii. 458.<br/>

HOLINSHED, quoted by Boswell, iv. 268, n. 2.<br/>

HOLLAND,<br/>

  exportation of coin free, iv. 105, n. 1;<br/>

  Dutch fond of draughts and smoking, i. 317;<br/>

    free from spleen, iv. 379;<br/>

  English books printed there, iii. 162;<br/>

  France, pressed by, in 1779, iii. 408, n. 4;<br/>

  Johnson's proposed tour there, i. 470; iii. 454;<br/>

  lead from two Cathedrals shipped to it, v. 114, n. 2;<br/>

  populous, iii. 233;<br/>

  Scotch regiment at Sluys, iii. 447;<br/>

  suspension of arms in 1782-3, iv. 282, n. 1;<br/>

  torture employed there, i. 466;<br/>

  trade, i. 218, n. 3.<br/>

HOLLAND, the actor, iv. 7.<br/>

HOLLAND, Dr., ii. 94, n. 2.<br/>

HOLLAND, first Lord, iv. 174, n. 5, 219, n. 3.<br/>

HOLLAND, third Lord,<br/>

  Boswell and Horace Walpole, iv. 314, n. 5;<br/>

  Jeffrey's 'narrow English,' ii. 159, n. 6;<br/>

  Johnson and Fox, iv. 167, n. 1;<br/>

    and Garrick, i. 216, n. 3.<br/>

HOLLAND HOUSE, iv. 174, n. 5.<br/>

HOLLIS, Thomas, iv. 97.<br/>

HOLLOWAY, Mr. M. M.,<br/>

  autograph letters of Johnson, iv. 260, n. 2; v. 405, n. 1, 454.<br/>

HOLROYD, John (Lord Sheffield), i. 465, n. 1; ii. 150, n, 7;<br/>

iii. 178, n. 1.<br/>

HOLY LAND, iii. 177.<br/>

HOME, Francis, Experiments on Bleaching, i. 309.<br/>

HOME, Henry. See LORD KAMES.<br/>

HOME, John,<br/>

  <i>Agis</i>, ii. 320, n. 1; v. 204;<br/>

  Athelstanford, minister of, iii. 47, n. 3;<br/>

  Bute's errand-goer, ii. 354;<br/>

    and favourite, i. 386, n. 3;<br/>

  Carlyle, Dr. A., described by, v. 362, n. 1;<br/>

  Derrick's lines, parodied, i. 456;<br/>

  <i>Douglas</i>, Garrick rejects it, v. 362, n. 1;<br/>

    Hume and Scott admire it, ii. 320, n. 1;<br/>

    Johnson despises it, ii. 320;<br/>

    not ten good lines in it, v. 360-2;<br/>

    Sheridan gives the author a gold medal for it, ii. 320; v. 360;<br/>

    lines in it applicable to Johnson, iii. 80;<br/>

    quotations from it, v. 361, n. 1;<br/>

  Elibank, Lord, his patron, v. 386;<br/>

  <i>History of the Rebellion of 1745</i>, iii. 162, n. 5;<br/>

  Hume's bequest to him, ii. 320, n. 1;<br/>

    dislike of the Whigs, iv. 194, n. 1;<br/>

    remark on the incapacity of the period, iii. 46, n. 5;<br/>

  Settle, likened to, iii. 76;<br/>

  Shakespeare of Scotland, iv. 186, n. 2;<br/>

  better than Shakspeare, v. 362, n. 1;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 53, n. 1, 381, n. 1.<br/>

HOMER,<br/>

  advice given to Diomed (Glaucus), ii. 129;<br/>

  antiquity, his, iii. 331;<br/>

  quoted by Thucydides, ib.;<br/>

  characters, does not describe, v. 79;<br/>

  detached fragments, not made up of, v. 164;<br/>

  <i>Iliad</i>, a collection of pieces, iii. 333;<br/>

  prose translation of it suggested, ib.;<br/>

    Latin version, ib., n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's early translation from him, i. 53;<br/>

    knowledge of him, iv. 218, n. 3; v. 79, n. 2;<br/>

  'machinery,'  his, iv. 16;<br/>

  <i>Odyssey</i>, Johnson's liking for it, iv. 218;<br/>

    Fox's, ib., n. 3;<br/>

    <i>Life of Johnson</i> likened to it, i. 12;<br/>

    quoted, iv. 444;<br/>

  prince of poets, ii. 129;<br/>

  Sarpedon,  Earl of Errol likened to, v. 103, n. 1;<br/>

  shield of Achilles, iv. 33; v. 78;<br/>

  translated by Cowper, iii. 333, n. 2;<br/>

    by Dacier, ib.;<br/>

    by Macpherson, ii. 298, n. 1; iii. 333, n. 2;<br/>

    by Pope, iii. 256;<br/>

  Virgil, compared with, iii. 193; v. 79, n. 2;<br/>

    less talked of than, iii. 332.<br/>

HOMFREY, family of, iv. 268, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Homo caudatus</i>, ii. 383.<br/>

HONESTY, iii. 237.<br/>

HONITON, iii. 287, n. 1.<br/>

HOOD, James, v. 66.<br/>

HOOKE, Dr. (at St. Cloud), ii. 397.<br/>

HOOKE, Nathaniel,<br/>

  writes the Duchess of Marlborough's <i>Apology</i>, v. 175.<br/>

HOOKER, Richard, i. 219.<br/>

HOOLE, John,<br/>

  account of him, ii. 289, n. 2; iv. 70;<br/>

  <i>Ariosto</i>, iv. 70;<br/>

  <i>Cleonice</i>, ii. 289, n. 3;<br/>

  dinners and suppers at his house, ii. 334; iii. 37, 342; iv. 88, 251;<br/>

  Essex Head Club, member of the, iv. 258;<br/>

  Johnson's bequest to him, iv. 402, n. 2;<br/>

    collects a City Club for, iv. 87;<br/>

    friendship with him, iv. 360;<br/>

    and Goldsmith, i. 414, n. 4;<br/>

    last days, iv. 399, n. 1, 406, 410, n. 2, 414;<br/>

    letters to him, ii. 289; iv. 359-60;<br/>

    recommends him to Warren Hastings, iv. 70;<br/>

    writes the dedication of his <i>Tasso</i>, i. 383;<br/>

  regularly educated, iv. 187;<br/>

  uncle, his, the metaphysical tailor, iii. 443; iv. 187;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 266.<br/>

HOOLE, Mrs., iv. 359.<br/>

HOOLE, Rev. Mr.,<br/>

  Johnson's bequest to him, iv. 402, n. 2;<br/>

    reads the service to, iv. 409;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 436, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Hop-Garden, The</i>, ii. 454.<br/>

HOPE,<br/>

  'A continual renovation of hope,' iv. 222, n. 5;<br/>

  Prince of Wales's enjoyment of it, iv. 182;<br/>

  a species of happiness, i. 368; ii. 351.<br/>

HOPE, Dr., of Edinburgh, iv. 263-4.<br/>

HOPE, Professor, of Edinburgh, v. 404.<br/>

HOPE, Sir William, v. 66.<br/>

HOPETON, second Earl of, iv. 43, n. 1.<br/>

HORACE,<br/>

  Art of Poetry, a contested passage in the, iii. 73-5;<br/>

  <i>Carmen Seculare</i> set to music, iii. 373;<br/>

  Mr. Tasker's version, ib., n. 3;<br/>

  cheerfulness, iii. 251;<br/>

  inconstancy, ib.;<br/>

  editions collected by Douglas, iv. 279;<br/>

  gratitude to his father, iii. 12;<br/>

  Hamilton's <i>Imitations</i>, iii. 151;<br/>

  Johnson translates <i>Odes</i>, i. 22, and ii. 9; i. 51-2;<br/>

    and <i>Ode</i>, iv. 7; iv. 370;<br/>

  Journey to <i>Brundusium</i> mentioned, iii. 250;<br/>

  metres, ii. 445, n. 1;<br/>

  middle-rate poets, on, ii. 351;<br/>

  <i>Nil admirari</i>, ii. 360;<br/>

  read as far as the Rhone, iv. 277;<br/>

  religion, absence of, iv. 215;<br/>

  '<i>sapientiae consultus</i>,' iii. 280;<br/>

  translations of the lyrics, iii. 356;<br/>

    Francis's, ib.;<br/>

  villa, iii. 250;<br/>

  quotations:<br/>

    1 <i>Odes</i>, i. 2, i. 244;<br/>

    1 <i>Odes</i>, ii. v. 101, n. 2;<br/>

    1 <i>Odes</i>, ii. 21, i. 483, n. 4;<br/>

    1 <i>Odes</i>, xii. 46, iv. 356, n. 3;<br/>

    1 <i>Odes</i>, xxii. 5, ii. 140;<br/>

    1 <i>Odes</i>, xxiv. 9, iv. 290, n. 4;<br/>

    1 <i>Odes</i>, xxvi. 1, ii. 140;<br/>

    1 <i>Odes</i>, xxxiv. 1, iii. 279;<br/>

    1 <i>Odes</i>, xxxiv. 1, iv. 215, n. 4;<br/>

    2 <i>Odes</i>, i. 4, i. 207;<br/>

    2 <i>Odes</i>, i. 24, iv. 374, n. 3;<br/>

    2 <i>Odes</i>, xvi. 1, v. 163;<br/>

    2 <i>Odes</i>, xiv., iii. 193; v. 68, n. 2;<br/>

    2 <i>Odes</i>, xx. 19, iv. 277, n. 2;<br/>

    3 <i>Odes</i>, i. 34, ii. 207;<br/>

    3 <i>Odes</i>, ii. 13, i. 181, n. 1;<br/>

    3 <i>Odes</i>, xxiv. 21, iii. 160, n. 1;<br/>

    3 <i>Odes</i>, ii., iii. 204;<br/>

    3 <i>Odes</i>, xxx. 1, ii. 291, n. 3;<br/>

    4 _Odes, iii. 2, i. 351, n. 1; iv. 57, n. 4;<br/>

    4 <i>Odes</i>, ix. 25, v. 415, n. 3;<br/>

    Epodes, xv. 19, iv. 320, n. 1;<br/>

    1 <i>Sat</i>. i. 66, iii. 322, n. 2;<br/>

    2 <i>Sat</i>. i. 86, iv. 129, n. 3;<br/>

    1 <i>Sat</i>. iii. 33, iv. 180, n. 5;<br/>

    1 <i>Sat</i> iv. 34, ii. 79;<br/>

    2 <i>Sat</i>. ii. 3, i. 105, n. 1;<br/>

    1 <i>Epis</i>. i. 15, v. 283, n. 2;<br/>

    1 <i>Epis</i>. ii. 41, iv. 120, n. 3;<br/>

    1 <i>Epis</i>. vi. 1, ii. 360, n. 3;<br/>

    1 <i>Epis</i>. vii. 96, ii. 337, n. 4;<br/>

    1 <i>Epis</i>. xi. 29, v. 381, n. 2;<br/>

    1 <i>Epis</i>. xiv. 13, iii. 417, n. 1;<br/>

    2 <i>Epis</i>. ii. 84, ii. 337, n. 3;<br/>

    2 <i>Epis</i>. ii. 102, i. 200;<br/>

    2 <i>Epis</i>. ii. 110, i. 220;<br/>

    2 <i>Epis</i>. ii. 212, iv. 355, n. 2;<br/>

    <i>Ars Poet</i>., line. 11, iii. 281, n. 4;<br/>

      l. 15, iv. 38, n. 5;<br/>

      l. 25, v. 78, n. 5;<br/>

      l. 39, iii. 404, n. 6;<br/>

      l. 41, ii. 126;<br/>

      l. 48, i. 221;<br/>

      l. 97, v. 399, n. 3;<br/>

      l. 126, v. 348, n. 1;<br/>

      l. 128, iii. 73;<br/>

      l. 142, ii. 13, n. 2;<br/>

      l. 161, v. 283, n. 3;<br/>

      l. 188, iii. 229, n. 3;<br/>

      l. 221, v. 375. n. 5;<br/>

      l. 317, i. 165:<br/>

      l. 372, ii. 351;<br/>

      l. 388, i. 196.<br/>

HORNE, Dr., President of Magdalen College, (afterwards Bishop of Norwich),<br/>

  Garrick's funeral, lines on, iv. 208, n. 1;<br/>

  Garrick and Mickle, anecdote of, ii. 182, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson's character, iv. 426, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Letter to Adam Smith</i>, v. 30, n. 3;<br/>

  neglected state of churches, v. 41, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Walton's Lives</i>, projected edition of, ii. 279, 283-4, 445.<br/>

HORNE, Rev. John. See TOOKE, Horne.<br/>

HORNECK,<br/>

  The Misses, i. 414, n. 1; ii. 209, n. 2, 274, n. 5; iv. 355, n. 4.<br/>

HORREBOW, Niels, iii. 279.<br/>

HORSE-TAX, v. 51.<br/>

HORSEMAN, ——, iv. 435.<br/>

HORSES, old, iv. 248, 250.<br/>

HORSLEY, Dr. (afterwards Bishop of Rochester),<br/>

  account of him, iv. 437;<br/>

  member of the Essex Head Club, iv. 254.<br/>

HORTON, Mrs., ii. 224, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Hosier's Ghost</i>, v. 116, n. 4.<br/>

HOSPITALITY,<br/>

  ancient, ii. 167;<br/>

  less need for it now, iv. 18;<br/>

  elaborate attention, iv. 222;<br/>

  in London, ii. 222;<br/>

  promiscuous, ii. 167;<br/>

  waste of time, iv. 221.<br/>

HOSPITALS, their administration, iii. 53.<br/>

HOSTILITY, temporary, iv. 266.<br/>

HOT-HOUSES, iv. 206.<br/>

'HOTTENTOT, a respectable,' i. 266;<br/>

  not Johnson, i. 267, n. 2.<br/>

HOUGHTON COLLECTION, iv. 334, n. 6.<br/>

HOUSE OF COMMONS,<br/>

  afraid of the populace, v. 102;<br/>

  Bolingbroke, described  by iii. 234, n. 2;<br/>

  bribed, must be, iii. 408;<br/>

  coarse invectives in 1784, iv. 297;<br/>

  city, contest with the, in 1771, ii. 300, n. 5; iv. 139;<br/>

  corruption, iii. 206, 234;<br/>

  Crosby the Lord Mayor committed by it to prison, iii. 459;<br/>

  debates: see DEBATES;<br/>

  dissolution of 1774, ii. 285; v. 460;<br/>

    of 1784. iv. 264, n. 2;<br/>

  election-committees, iv. 74;<br/>

  figure made by insignificant men, v. 269;<br/>

  influence of the Crown, motion on the, iv. 220;<br/>

  influence of the peers, v. 56;<br/>

  Johnson's account of it as it originally was, iii. 408;<br/>

    anecdote of Henry VIII, ib.;<br/>

    only once inside the building, i. 503-4;<br/>

  Middlesex Election: See under MIDDLESEX ELECTION;<br/>

  mixed body, iii. 234;<br/>

  Nowell's sermon on January 30, iv. 296;<br/>

  power of the nation's money, iv. 170;<br/>

  relation to the people, iv. 30;<br/>

  speaking at the bar, iii. 224;<br/>

    Wilkes's advice, ib.;<br/>

  speaking before a Committee, iv. 74;<br/>

    counsel paid for speaking, iv. 281;<br/>

  speeches, how far affected by, iii. 234-5;<br/>

  tenacity of forms, iv. 104;<br/>

  Wilkes, afraid of, iv. 140, n. I;<br/>

    resolution to expel him expunged, ii. 112.<br/>

HOUSE OF LORDS, Copy-right Case, ii. 272;<br/>

  Corporation of Stirling Case, ii. 374;<br/>

  dissatisfaction with its judicature, ii. 421, n. 1;<br/>

  Douglas Cause, ii. 230, n. 1;<br/>

  lay peers in law cases, iii. 345;<br/>

  'noble stands,' made, v. 102;<br/>

  Scotch Schoolmaster's Case, ii. 144, 186;<br/>

  wise and independent, iii. 204.<br/>

HOUSEBREAKERS, iv. 127.<br/>

HOVEDEN, iv. 310, n. 3.<br/>

HOWARD, Hon. Edward, ii. 108, n. 2.<br/>

HOWARD, General Sir George, ii. 375, n. 1.<br/>

HOWARD, Lord, v. 403, n. 2.<br/>

HOWARD, Sir Robert, ii. 168, n. 2.<br/>

HOWARD,—, of Lichfield, i. 80, 515, 516; iii. 222.<br/>

HOWARD,—, of Lichfield, the younger, iii. 222.<br/>

HOWELL, James, in the Fleet, v. 137, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>'Stavo bene,'</i> &amp;c., ii. 346, n. 6.<br/>

<i>Howell's State Trials</i>, Somerset's Case, iii. 87, n. 3.<br/>

HUDDESFORD, Rev. Dr., Vice-Chancellor of Oxford, i. 280, 322;<br/>

  Johnson's letter to him, i. 282.<br/>

<i>Hudibras. See</i> BUTLER, Samuel.<br/>

 HUET, Bishop, iii. 172, n. 1.<br/>

HUGGINS, William, quarrel with Warton, iv. 6;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 382.<br/>

HUGHES, John, <i>Memoir</i> by Duncombe, iii. 314, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Sieges of Damascus</i>, iii. 259, n. 1;<br/>

  Spenser, edits, i. 270;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 36, n. 4.<br/>

HUGILL, an attorney, iii. 297, n. 2.<br/>

HULK, The Justitia, iii. 268.<br/>

HUMANITY, its common rights, iv. 191, 284.<br/>

HUMBLE-BEE, v. 380, n. 3.<br/>

HUME, David, account of his publications, v. 31, n. 1;<br/>

  Adams, Dr., answers his <i>Essay on Miracles</i>, i. 8, n. 2;<br/>

ii. 441; iv. 377, n. a; v. 274;<br/>

  Adams the architects, ii. 325, n. 3;<br/>

  Agutter's sermon, attacked in, iv. 422, n. 1;<br/>

  American war, iv. 194, n. 1;<br/>

  ancient history, ii. 237, n. 4;<br/>

  art, indifference to, i. 363, n. 3;<br/>

  atheists in Paris, dines with seventeen, ii. 8, n. 4;<br/>

  attacks, reply to, ii. 61, n. 4;<br/>

    benefited by some, v. 274;<br/>

  Beattie's <i>Essay on Truth: see</i> BEATTIE;<br/>

  Blacklock, the blind poet, i. 466, n. I; v. 47, n. 3;<br/>

  books, the small number of good, iii. 20, n. 1;<br/>

  Boswell intimate with him, ii. 59, n 3,437; n. 2; v30;<br/>

    preserves memoirs of him, ib.;<br/>

  Boufflers, Mme. de, ii. 405, n. 2;<br/>

  Carlyle's, Dr., account of him, v. 30, n. 1;<br/>

  change of ministry in 1775, expects a, ii. 381, n. 1;<br/>

  Charles II, partiality for, ii. 341, n. 2;<br/>

  Cheyne, Dr., letter to, iii. 27, n. 1;<br/>

  composed with facility, v. 66, n. 3;<br/>

  conceit, his, v. 29;<br/>

  conversation, ii. 236, n. 1;<br/>

  death, said that he had no fear of, ii. 106; iii. 153;<br/>

  dedications, iv. 105, n. 4;<br/>

  Deist, denied that he was a, ii. 8;<br/>

  <i>Dialogues on Natural Religion</i>, i. 268, n, 4;<br/>

  dines with those who had written against him, ii. 441, n. 5;<br/>

  Douglas Cause, ii. 230, n. 1;<br/>

  education and disposition, opinion on, ii. 437, n. 2;<br/>

  England on the decline, ii. 127, n. 4;<br/>

  English and French politeness, iv. 237, n. 3;<br/>

  English, his hatred of the, ii. 300, n. 5; v. 19, n. 4;<br/>

    neglect of polite letters, ii. 447, n. 5;<br/>

    prejudice against the Scotch, ii. 300, n. 5;<br/>

    prose, iii. 257, n. 3;<br/>

    and Scotch education, iii. 12, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Essays Moral and Political</i>, sale of his, iv. 440;<br/>

  fame, his, v. 31;<br/>

  Fergusson's <i>Essay on Civil Society</i>, v. 42, n. 1;<br/>

  France on the decline, thinks, ii. 127, n. 4;<br/>

  his reception there, ii. 401, n. 4;<br/>

  French, ignorance of, i. 439, n. 2;<br/>

  French prisoners, account of the, i. 353, n. 2;<br/>

  Germany, barbarians of, ii. 127, n. 4;<br/>

  Gibbon's praise of him, ii. 236, n. 3;<br/>

  Glasgow professorship, sought a, v. 369, n. 2;<br/>

  'gone to milk the bull,' i. 444;<br/>

  happiness, equality in, ii. 9; iii. 288;<br/>

  happy with small means, i. 372, n. 1;<br/>

  Henry's <i>History</i>, reviews, iii. 334, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>History of England</i>,<br/>

    his alterations in it on the Tory side, iv. 194, n. 1;<br/>

    Adam Smith's <i>Letter</i> prefixed, v. 30, n. 3;<br/>

    slow sale of the first volume, v. 31, n. 1;<br/>

    written for want of occupation, iii. 20, n. 1;<br/>

    mentioned, iv. 78, n. 2;<br/>

  Hobbist, a, v. 272;<br/>

  Home, John, and Shakespeare, ii. 320, n. 1;<br/>

  Home, bequest to, ii. 320, n. 1;<br/>

  house, his, in James Court, v. 22, n. 2;<br/>

    in St. David Street, v. 28, n. 2;<br/>

  Hurd and the Warburtonian school, iv. 190, n. 1;<br/>

  hypocrite, longs to be a successful, iv. 194, n. 1;<br/>

  'infidel pensioner,' called an, ii. 317;<br/>

  infidels, attacks, iii. 334, n. 1;<br/>

  infidelity, his death-bed, iii. 153;<br/>

  infidelity, his, less read, iv. 288;<br/>

  Johnson and Convocation, i. 464;<br/>

    <i>Dictionary</i>, absurdities in, ii. 317, n. 1;<br/>

    in the Green Room, i. 201;<br/>

    had not (in 1773) read his <i>History</i>, ii. 236;<br/>

    likes him better than Robertson, v. 57, n. 3;<br/>

    violent against him, v. 30;<br/>

  Kames and Voltaire, ii. 90, n. 1;<br/>

  Keeper of the Advocates' Library, v. 40, n. 1;<br/>

  Leechman's <i>Sermon on Prayer</i>, v. 68, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Life</i>, with Adam Smith's letter prefixed, iii. 119;<br/>

  Macdonald, Sir James, i. 449, n. 2;<br/>

  Macpherson's <i>Homer</i> and <i>History of Britain</i>, ii. 298, n. 1;<br/>

  Mallet and Bolingbroke, i. 268, n. 4;<br/>

  Mallet's <i>Life of Marlborough</i>, iii. 386, n. 1;<br/>

  middle class in Scotland, absence of a, ii. 402, n. 1;<br/>

  Millar, Andrew, i. 287, n. 3;<br/>

  ministry, imbecility of Lord North's, iii. 46, n. 5;<br/>

  <i>Miracles, Essay on</i>, i. 444; iii. 188:<br/>

    see under Dr. ADAMS and BEATTIE;<br/>

  Monboddo's <i>Origin of Language</i>, ii. 259, n. 5;<br/>

  Murray (Lord Mansfield), at Lovat's trial, speech of, i. 181, n. 1;<br/>

  national debt, ii. 127, n. 4;<br/>

  neglect of a book, iii. 375, n. 1;<br/>

  New Testament, ignorance of the, ii. 9; iii. 153;<br/>

  <i>Ossian</i>, ii. 302, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Parties in General</i>, iii. 11, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Parties of Great Britain</i>, ii. 402, n. 1;<br/>

  pension, ii. 317, n. 1;<br/>

  philosopher, anecdote of a, iii. 305, n. 2;<br/>

  Poker Club, ii. 376, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Political Discourses</i>, ii. 53, n. 2;<br/>

  Pretender's base character, v. 200, n. 1;<br/>

    visit to London, i. 279, n. 5; v. 201, n. 3;<br/>

  priests and dissenters, v. 255, n. 5;<br/>

  'principle, has no,' iv. 194, n. 1; v. 272;<br/>

  Reynolds's allegorical  picture, v. 273, n. 4;<br/>

  resistance, doctrine of, ii. 170. n. 2:<br/>

  Robertson's <i>Scotland</i>, price offered for, iii. 334, n. 2;<br/>

  Rousseau's visit to England and his pension, ii. 11, n. 4, 12, n. 1;<br/>

  Russia, barbarians of, ii. 127, n. 4;<br/>

  Sanquhar's trial, v. 103, n. 2;<br/>

  Scotch writers, foolish praise of, iv. 186, n. 2;<br/>

  Scotticisms, ii. 72;<br/>

    corrected by Strahan, v. 92, n. 3;<br/>

  second-sight, ii. 10, n. 3;<br/>

  Select Society, member of the, v. 393, n. 4;<br/>

  sentiments, unanimity and contrariety of, iii. 11, n. 1;<br/>

  Smith's, Adam, <i>Letter</i>, v. 30;<br/>

    answered by Dr. Home, ib., n. 3;<br/>

  Smith's, suggested knocking of his head against, iii. 119;<br/>

  soldiers, iii. 9, n. 3;<br/>

  Strahan, leaves his MSS. to, ii. 136, n. 6;<br/>

  style, i. 439;<br/>

  Swift's style, ii. 191, n. 3;<br/>

  Tory by chance, iv. 194; v. 272;<br/>

  Toryism, growth of his, iv. 194, n. 1;<br/>

  touchstones of party-men, i. 354, n. 1;<br/>

  tragedy, anecdote of a, iii. 238, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Treatise of Human Nature</i>, i. 127, n. 1;<br/>

  Tytler, attacked by, v. 274;<br/>

  'Voltaire, an echo of,' ii. 53;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 160, n. 2.<br/>

HUME, Mrs., James Thomson's grandmother, iii. 359.<br/>

<i>Humiliating</i>, ii. 155.<br/>

HUMMUMS, The, iii. 349.<br/>

HUMOUR. See GOOD HUMOUR.<br/>

HUMOUR, Scotch nation not distinguished for it, iv. 129.<br/>

<i>Humours of Ballamagairy</i>, ii. 219, n. 1.<br/>

HUMPHRY, Ozias,<br/>

  account of him, iv. 268, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's letters to him, iv. 268-9;<br/>

  his miniature, iv. 421, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Humphry Clinker</i>. See SMOLLETT.<br/>

HUNGARY, hospitality to strangers, iv. 18.<br/>

HUNTER, John, the surgeon, i. 243, n. 3; iv. 220, n. 1.<br/>

HUNTER, Dr. William, iv. 220.<br/>

HUNTER, ——, Johnson's schoolmaster, i. 44-6; ii. 146, 467.<br/>

HUNTER, Miss, iv. 183, n. 2.<br/>

HUNTER, Mrs., i. 516.<br/>

HUNTING, v. 253.<br/>

HUNTINGDON, tenth Earl of, iii. 84, n. 1.<br/>

HURD, Richard, Bishop of Worcester,<br/>

  accounts for everything systematically, iv. 189;<br/>

  Addison, impertinent notes on, iv. 190, n. 1;<br/>

  archbishop, declined to be, iv. 190;<br/>

  Boswell attacks him, iv. 47, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Cowley's Select Works</i>, edits, iii. 29, 227;<br/>

  evil spirits, on, iv. 290; v. 36, n. 3;<br/>

  Horace, notes on, iii. 74, n. 1;<br/>

  Hume, attacks, iv. 190, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson praises him, iv. 190;<br/>

  <i>Moral and Political Dialogues</i>, iv. 190;<br/>

  <i>Parr's Tracts by Warburton and a Warburtonian</i>, iv. 47, n. 2;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 404, n. 1; ii. 36, n. 2; iv. 407, n, 4.<br/>

'HURGOES,' i. 502.<br/>

HUSSEY, Rev. John, Johnson's letter to him, iii. 369.<br/>

HUSSEY, Rev. Dr. Thomas, iv. 411.<br/>

HUTCHESON, Francis, on <i>merit</i>, iv. 15, n. 5.<br/>

HUTCHINSON, John, <i>Moral Philosophy</i>, iii. 53.<br/>

HUTCHISON, William, of Kyle, v. 107, n. 1.<br/>

HUTTON, the Moravian, iv. 410.<br/>

HUTTON, William (of Birmingham),<br/>

  Bedlam, visits, ii. 374, n. 1;<br/>

  Birmingham, cost of living at, i. 103, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Derby, History of</i>, iii. 164, n. 1;<br/>

  sufferings as a factory-boy, iii. 164, n. 1.<br/>

HYDER ALI, v. 124, n. 2.<br/>

HYPOCAUST, a Roman, v. 435.<br/>

HYPOCHONDRIA, i. 66, 343; iii. 192.<br/>

  See under BOSWELL, JOHNSON, and MELANCHOLY.<br/>

<i>Hypochondriack, The</i>, iv. 179, n. 5.<br/>

HYPOCRISY,<br/>

  little suspected by Johnson, i. 418, n. 3;<br/>

  middle state between it and conviction, iv. 122;<br/>

  no man a hypocrite in his pleasures, iv. 316.<br/>

<i>Hypocrite, The</i>, ii. 321.<br/>
</p>

<h3>I.</h3>

<p>ICELAND,<br/>

  Horrebow's <i>Natural History</i>, iii. 279;<br/>

  Johnson talks of visiting it, i. 242; iii. 454; iv. 358, n. 2.<br/>

ICOLMKILL. See IONA.<br/>

<i>Idea</i>, improperly used, iii. 196.<br/>

IDLENESS,<br/>

  active sports not idleness, i. 48;<br/>

  hidden from oneself, i. 331, n. 1;<br/>

  miseries of it, i. 331;<br/>

  upon principle, iv. 9;<br/>

  why we are weary when idle, ii. 98.<br/>

<i>Idler, The</i> (an earlier paper than Johnson's), i. 330, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Idler, The</i> (Johnson's),<br/>

  account of it, i. 331-5;<br/>

  Betty Broom, story of, iv. 246;<br/>

  collected in volumes, i. 335;<br/>

  Johnson draws his own portrait in Mr. Sober, iii. 398, n. 3;<br/>

    writes on his mother's death, i. 331, n. 4, 339, n. 3;<br/>

  mottoes, i. 332;<br/>

  No. 22 omitted in collected vols., i. 335;<br/>

  pirated, i. 345, n. 1;<br/>

  profits on first edition, i. 335, n. 1;<br/>

  tragedians, a hit at, v. 38, n. 1.<br/>

IFFLEY, iv. 295.<br/>

IGNORANCE,<br/>

  guilt of voluntarily continuing  it, ii. 27;<br/>

  in men of eminence, ii. 91;<br/>

  people content to be ignorant, i. 397.<br/>

ILAM. See ISLAM.<br/>

<i>Ilk</i>,<br/>

  defined in Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>, iii. 326, n. 4;<br/>

  'Johnson of that Ilk,' ii. 427, n. 2.<br/>

ILLEGITIMATE CHILDREN, ii. 457.<br/>

IMAGES, worship of, iii. 17, 188.<br/>

<i>Imagination</i>, iii. 341.<br/>

IMITATIONS OF POEMS, i. 118, n. 5, 122.<br/>

IMLAC, why so spelt, iv. 31. See also under <i>Rasselas</i>.<br/>

IMMORTALITY,<br/>

  belief of it impressed on all, ii. 358;<br/>

  of brutes, ii. 54.<br/>

IMPARTIALITY IN TELLING LIES, ii. 434.<br/>

IMPIETY,<br/>

  inundation of it due to the Revolution, v. 271;<br/>

  repressed in Johnson's company, iv. 295.<br/>

IMPORTANCE, imaginary, iii. 327.<br/>

IMPOSTORS, Literary,<br/>

  Douglas, Dr., i. 360;<br/>

  Du Halde, ii. 55, n. 4;<br/>

  Eccles, Rev. Mr., i. 360;<br/>

  Innes, Rev. Dr., i. 359;<br/>

  Rolt, E., i. 359.<br/>

<i>Impransus</i>, i. 137.<br/>

IMPRESSIONS,<br/>

  trusting to them, iv. 122-3;<br/>

  early ones, iv. 197, n. 1.<br/>

<i>In Theatro</i>, ii. 324, n. 3.<br/>

INCE, Richard, a contributor to the Spectator, iii. 33.<br/>

<i>Inchkenneth, Ode on</i>, ii. 293; v. 325.<br/>

<i>Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare Charybdim</i>, iv. 181, n. 3.<br/>

INCIVILITY, iv. 28.<br/>

INCOME, living within one's, iv. 226.<br/>

INDECISION OF MIND, iii. 300.<br/>

<i>Index-scholar</i>, iv. 407, n. 4, 442.<br/>

INDIA,<br/>

  despotic governor the best, iv. 2l3;<br/>

  'don't give us India,' v. 209;<br/>

  grant of natural superiority, iv. 68;<br/>

  hereditary trades, v. 120,<br/>

  Johnson's wish to visit it, iii. 134; n. 1, 456;<br/>

  judges there engaging in trade, ii. 343;<br/>

  mapping of it, ii. 356;<br/>

  nursery of ruined fortunes, iv. 213, n. 1;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 194.<br/>

  See EAST INDIES and INDIES.<br/>

INDIAN BILL, Fox's,<br/>

  Ministry dismissed on it, i. 311, n. 1;<br/>

  Lee's piece of parchment, iii. 224, n. 1.<br/>

INDIANS, American,<br/>

  story told of them by two officers, iii. 246; v. 135;<br/>

  their weak children die, iv. 210;<br/>

  wronged, i. 308, n. 2.<br/>

  See NATIVES.<br/>

INDICTMENT, prosecution by, iii. 16, n. 1.<br/>

INDIES, the,<br/>

  discovery of the passage thither a misfortune, i. 455, n. 3;<br/>

  proverb about bringing home their wealth, iii. 302.<br/>

<i>Indifferently</i>, i. 180.<br/>

INDOLENCE, iv. 352.<br/>

INFERIORITY, 'half a guinea's worth of it,' ii. 169.<br/>

INFIDELITY abroad, iv. 288;<br/>

  affectation of showing courage, ii. 81;<br/>

  gloom of it, ii. 81;<br/>

  outcry about it, ii. 359. See CONJUGAL INFIDELITY.<br/>

INFIDELS,<br/>

  compared with atrocious criminals, iii. 55;<br/>

  credulity, their, v. 331;<br/>

  ennui, must suffer from, ii. 442, n. 1;<br/>

  keeping company with them, iii. 409-10;<br/>

  number in England, ii. 359;<br/>

  treating them with civility, ii. 442;<br/>

  writings allowed to pass without censure, v. 271;<br/>

  writers drop into oblivion, iv. 288.<br/>

INFLUENCE,<br/>

  America might be governed  by it, iii. 205;<br/>

  crown influence salutary, ii. 118;<br/>

    Bute's attempt to govern by, ii. 353;<br/>

    lost and recovered, iii. 4;<br/>

    vote of the House of Commons against it, iv. 220;<br/>

  in domestic life, iii. 205, n. 4;<br/>

  Ireland governed by it, iii. 205;<br/>

  property, in proportion to, v. 56;<br/>

  wealth, from, v. 112.<br/>

INFLUENZA, ii. 410.<br/>

INGENHOUSZ, Dr., ii. 427, n. 4.<br/>

INGRATITUDE,<br/>

  complaints of, iii. 2;<br/>

  Lewis XIV's saying, ii. 167.<br/>

INNES, or INNYS, Rev. Dr.,<br/>

  fraud about Dr. Campbell, i. 359;<br/>

    about Psalmanazar, i. 359, n. 3; iii. 444-5, 447-8.<br/>

INNKEEPERS, soldiers quartered on them, ii. 218, n. 1.<br/>

INNOCENT, punishment of the, iv. 251.<br/>

INNOVATION, iv. 188.<br/>

INNS,<br/>

  felicity of England in the, ii. 451;<br/>

  Shenstone's lines, ii. 452.<br/>

INNYS, William, the bookseller, iv. 402, n. 2, 440.<br/>

INOCULATION, iv. 293; v. 226.<br/>

INQUISITION, i. 465.<br/>

INSANITY. See JOHNSON, madness, and MADNESS.<br/>

INSCRIPTIONS. See EPITAPHS.<br/>

INSECTS, their numerous species, ii. 248.<br/>

INSURRECTION OF 1745,<br/>

  Boswells projected <i>History</i> of it, iii. 162, 414;<br/>

  Voltaire's account, ib., n. 6;<br/>

  hard to write impartially, v. 393.<br/>

INTELLECTUAL IMPROVEMENT, due to subordination, ii. 219.<br/>

INTELLECTUAL LABOUR, mankind's aversion to it, i. 397.<br/>

INTENTIONS, ii. 12;<br/>

  Hell paved with good intentions, ii. 360.<br/>

INTEREST, how far we are governed by it, ii. 234.<br/>

INTEREST OF MONEY, iii. 340.<br/>

INTOXICATION, said to be good for the health, v. 260;<br/>

  see DRUNKENNESS, SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS, WINE;<br/>

  and JOHNSON, intoxicated, and wine; and BOSWELL, wine.<br/>

<i>Introduction to the Game of Draughts</i>, i. 317.<br/>

<i>Introduction to the Political State of Great Britain</i>, i. 307.<br/>

<i>Introduction to the World displayed</i>, iv. 251.<br/>

INTUITION, iv. 335.<br/>

INVASION, fears of an, iii. 326, 360, n. 3.<br/>

INVITATION, going into the society of friends without one, ii. 362.<br/>

INVOCATION OF SAINTS. See SAINTS.<br/>

INWARD LIGHT, ii. 126.<br/>

IRELAND and IRISH,<br/>

  accent, ii. 160;<br/>

  ancient state, i. 321; iii. 112;<br/>

  baronets, traditional, v. 322, n. 1;<br/>

  Belanager, iii. 111, n. 4;<br/>

  British government, barbarous, ii. 121;<br/>

  Burke's saying about the Roman Catholics, ii. 255, n. 3;<br/>

  Catholics persecuted by Protestants, ii. 255;<br/>

    penal code against them, ii. 121, n. 1;<br/>

    their students abroad, iii. 447 (see below under WESLEY);<br/>

  clergy, ii. 132;<br/>

  condemned to ignorance, ii. 27, n. 1;<br/>

  corn-laws, ii. 130;<br/>

  corrupt government, iv. 200, n. 4;<br/>

  cottagers, ii. 130, n. 2;<br/>

  'drained' by England, v. 44;<br/>

  Drogheda, ii. 156;<br/>

  drunkenness of the gentry, v. 250, n. 1;<br/>

  Dublin, Derrick's poem to it, i. 456;<br/>

    Capital, only a worse, iii. 410;<br/>

    <i>Evening Post</i>, iv. 381, n. 1;<br/>

    freedom of the guild given to Chief Justice Pratt, ii. 353, n. 2;<br/>

    'not so bad as Iceland,' iv. 358, n. 2;<br/>

    physicians, iii. 288, n. 4;<br/>

    Rolt's fraud, i. 359;<br/>

    Theatre, <i>Douglas</i> acted, ii. 320, n. 2;<br/>

      riot in it, i. 386;<br/>

      Miss Philips the singer, iv. 227;<br/>

    University, Burke and Goldsmith at Trinity College, i. 411;<br/>

      Flood's bequest for the study of Irish, i. 321, n. 5;<br/>

      M.A. degree in vain sought for Johnson, i. 133;<br/>

      LL.D. degree conferred, i. 488;<br/>

  duelling, ii. 226, n. 5;<br/>

  export duties, ii. 131, n. 1;<br/>

  fair people, a, ii. 307;<br/>

  Falkland, ii. 116;<br/>

  family pride, v. 263;<br/>

  Ferns, iv. 73;<br/>

  French, contrasted with, ii. 402, n. 1;<br/>

  Grattan's speeches, iv. 317;<br/>

  <i>History</i>, Johnson exhorts Maxwell to write its, ii. 121;<br/>

  hospitality to strangers, iv. 18;<br/>

  independence in 1782, iv. 139, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>influence</i>, governed by, ii. 205;<br/>

  Insolvent Debtors' Relief Bill of 1766, iii. 377, n. 2;<br/>

  Irish chairmen in London, ii. 101;<br/>

  Johnson averse to visit it, iii. 410;<br/>

    kindness for the Irish, iii. 410;<br/>

    pity for them, ii. 121;<br/>

    prejudice against them, i. 130;<br/>

  lady's verses on Ireland, iii. 319;<br/>

  landlords and tenants, v. 250, n. 1;<br/>

  language, i. 321, n. 5, 322; ii. 156, 347; iii. 112, 235;<br/>

  literature, i. 321;<br/>

  Londonderry, iv. 334; v. 319;<br/>

  Lucan, v. 108, n. 8;<br/>

  Lucas, Dr., i. 311;<br/>

  mask of incorruption never worn, iv. 200, n. 4;<br/>

  minority prevails over majority, ii. 255, 478;<br/>

  mix with the English better than the Scotch do, ii. 242; iv. 169, n. 1;<br/>

  nationality, free from extreme, ii. 242;<br/>

  orchards never planted by Irishmen, iv. 206, n. 1;<br/>

  parliament, duration of, i. 311, n. 2;<br/>

    long debates in 1771, i. 394, n. 1;<br/>

  peers created in 1776, iii. 407, n. 4;<br/>

  players, succeed as, ii. 242;<br/>

  Pope's lines on Swift, ii. 132, n. 2;<br/>

  premium-scheme, i. 318;<br/>

  professors at Oxford and Paris Irish, i. 321, n. 6;<br/>

  Protestant  rebels in 1779, iii. 408, n. 4;<br/>

  rebellion ready to break out in 1779, iii. 408, n. 4;<br/>

  scholars incorrect in <i>quantity</i>, ii. 132;<br/>

  school of the west, iii. 112;<br/>

  Swift, their great benefactor, ii. 132;<br/>

  Thurot's descent, iv. l01, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy</i>, iv. 385;<br/>

  union wished for by artful politicians, iii. 410;<br/>

    Johnson's warning against it, ib.;<br/>

  volunteers, not allowed to raise, iii. 360, n. 3;<br/>

  Wesley against toleration, v. 35, n. 3;<br/>

  William III and the Irish parliament, ii. 255.<br/>

<i>Irene</i>,<br/>

  altered for the stage and acted, i. 192, n. 3, 196;<br/>

  nine nights' run, i. 197, n. 5;<br/>

  never brought on the stage again, i. 198, n. 1;<br/>

  begun at Edial, i. l00;<br/>

  continued at Greenwich, i. 106;<br/>

  finished at Lichfield, i. 107;<br/>

  refused by Fleetwood, i. 153;<br/>

  offered to a bookseller, ib.;<br/>

  blank verse, iv. 42, n. 7;<br/>

  Cave, shown to, i. 123;<br/>

  dedication, no, ii. 1, n. 2;<br/>

  Demetrius's speech quoted, i. 237;<br/>

  dramatic power wanting, i. 198, 199, n. 2, 506;<br/>

  <i>Epilogue</i>, i. 197;<br/>

  Hill, Aaron, present at the benefit, i. 198, n. 4;<br/>

  Johnson hears it read aloud, iv. 5;<br/>

    reads it himself, ib., n. 1;<br/>

    his receipts from the acting and copyright, i. 198;<br/>

  original sketch of it, i. 108; Pot admires it, iv. 5, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Prologue</i>, i. 196;<br/>

  quotable lines, i. 199, n. 2.<br/>

IRISH GENTLEMAN, an, on the blackness of negroes, i. 401.<br/>

IRISH PAINTER, an, Johnson's <i>Ofellus</i>, i. 104.<br/>

IRON-WORKS at Holywell, v. 441.<br/>

IRVINE, Mr., of Drum, v. 98.<br/>

IRVING, Rev. Edward, iv. 9, n. 5.<br/>

IRWIN, Captain, ii. 391.<br/>

ISIS, THE, iv. 295.<br/>

ISLAM,<br/>

  Boswell and Johnson visit it, i. 183, n. 4; iii. 187;<br/>

  Johnson and the Thrales, v. 429, 434, 457.<br/>

ISLAND, retiring to one, v. 154.<br/>

ISLE OF MAN,<br/>

  Boswell's projected tour, iii. 80;<br/>

  Burke's motto, ib.;<br/>

  Sacheverell's <i>Account</i>. See under Sacheverell, W.;<br/>

  mentioned, v. 233.<br/>

ITALY,<br/>

  condemned prisoners, treatment of, iv. 331;<br/>

  copy-money, iii. 162;<br/>

  <i>Guide-Books</i>, v. 61;<br/>

  inferiority in not having seen it, iii. 36, 456;<br/>

  Johnson's wish to visit it: see JOHNSON, Italy;<br/>

  revival of letters, iii. 254;<br/>

  silk-throwing, iii. 164, n. 1.<br/>

IVY LANE CLUB. See under CLUBS.<br/>
</p>

<h3>J.</h3>

<p id="id00839" style="margin-left: 0%; margin-right: 0%"><i>Jack the Giant Killer</i>, ii. 58, n. 1; iv. 8, n. 3.
JACKSON, Henry, of Lichfield, ii. 463; iii. 131.
JACKSON, Rev. Mr., i. 239, n. 1.
JACKSON, Richard,
  all-knowing, iii. 19;
  commends Johnson's <i>Journey</i>, iii. 137.
JACKSON, Thomas, Michael Johnson's servant, i. 38.
JACOB, Giles, v. 419, n. 2.
JACOBITES, identified with Tories, i. 429, n. 4.
JACOBITISM. See under BOSWELL and JOHNSON.
JAMAICA,
  constitutions of, iii. 202;
  den of tyrants, ii. 478;
  story of a young man going there, iv. 332;
  mentioned, i. 239, n. 1, 242, n. 1; iii. 76, n. 2, 416, n. 2.
JAMES I (of England),
  <i>Daemonology</i>, iii. 382;
  Johnson, resemblance to, v. 12;
  Nairne, witticism about, v. 117, n. 3;
  Raleigh's trial, i. 180, n. 2;
  Sanquhar's trial, v. 103, n. 2;
  mentioned, ii. 175.
JAMES II,
  deposition needful, i. 430; ii. 341;
  George III, compared with, iv. 139, n. 4;
  king, very good, ii. 341;
  Sedley, Catherine, v. 49, n. 5;
  mentioned, ii. 437, n. 2; v. 297, n. 1, 357, n. 3.
JAMES I of Scotland, ii. 7.
JAMES IV, patron of Boswell's family, ii. 413; v. 91.
JAMES V, v. 181.
JAMES, King (the Pretender), i. 429.
JAMES, Dr. Robert,
  death, i. 81; iii. 4;
  <i>Dissertation on Fevers</i>, iii. 389, n. 2;
  Greek, knowledge of, iv. 33, n. 3;
  Johnson describes his character, i. 81, 159;
    learnt physic from him, iii. 22;
    opinion of his medicines, iv. 355;
    dedication to his <i>Medicinal Dictionary</i>, i. 159;
    assisted him in writing the <i>Medicinal Dictionary</i>, iii. 22;
  powder, his, its sale, iii. 4;
    traduced, iii. 389, n. 2;
  suspected of being not sober for twenty years, iii. 389, n. 2;
  wrote first line of the epigram <i>Ad Lauram</i>, i. 157, n. 5;
  mentioned, iii. 318, n. 1.
JANES, ——, a naturalist, v. 149, 163, 408, n. 1.
JANSENISTS, iii. 341, n. 1.
JANUARY 30,
  fast of, ii. 152;
  old port and solemn talk on it, iii. 371.
<i>Janus Vitalis</i>, iii. 251.
JAPAN, five persecutions, v. 392.
JAPIX, Gisbert, <i>Rymelerie</i>, i. 476.
JARVIS, ——, a Birmingham person, i. 86, n. 1.
JARVIS, or Jervis,
  the maiden name of Johnson's wife, i. 86, n. 1, 241, n. 2.
<i>Jealous Wife, The</i>, i. 364.
JEALOUSY, little people given to it, iii. 55.
JEFFERIES, Judge, v. 113, n. 1.
JEFFREY, Francis (Lord Jeffrey),
  birth, v. 24, n. 4;
  helps Boswell to bed, ib.;
  <i>Edinburgh Review</i>, payment to writers, iv. 214, n. 2;
  Scotch accent, loses his, ii. 159, n. 6;
  title, his, v. 77, n, 4;
  trees in Scotland, ii. 301, n. 1.
JENKINSON, Right Hon. Charles (first Earl of Liverpool),
  account of him, iii. 146, n. 1;
  Johnson's letter to him, iii. 145-7.
JENNINGS, Mr., iii. 231.
JENYNS, Soame,
  benevolence as a motive to action, iii. 48;
  character, his, iii. 289, n. 1;
  conversion, i. 316, n. 2; iii. 280;
  'Epitaph,' i. 316, n. 2;
  <i>Free Inquiry into the Nature and Origin of Evil</i>, i. 309, 315;
  Johnson's <i>Review</i> of it, i. 315-316; ii. 188, n. 6; iii. 48, n. 3;
  Johnson, attacks, i. 316;
  <i>View of the Internal Evidence, &amp;c.</i>, iii. 48, n. 3, 288;
  <i>World</i>, contributor to the, i. 257, n. 3.
JEPHSON, Robert, i. 262, n. 1.
JERSEY, v. 142, n. 2.
JERSEY, Earl of, i. 31, n. 4.
JERUSALEM, ii. 275-6.
<i>Jests of Hierocles</i>, i. 150.
JESUITS,
  attacked by Psalmanazar, iii. 444;
  persecuted in Japan, v. 392, n. 5.
JEWISH KINGS, v. 340.
JEWITT, Mr. L., ii. 324, n. 1.
JOCULARITY, low, i. 449.
JODDREL (Jodrell), R. P., iv. 254, 272, 437.
JODRELL, Sir R. P., M.D., iv. 437.
JOHN, King, i. 248.
<i>John Bull</i>, v. 20, n. 2.
<i>Johnny Armstrong</i>,
  quoted by Johnson for its abruptness, i. 403;
  in Holyrood, v. 43.
JOHNSON, B., the actor, iv. 243, n. 6.
JOHNSON, Andrew (Johnson's uncle),
  great at boxing and wrestling, iv. 111, n. 3; v. 229, n. 2.
JOHNSON, Charles, author of <i>The Adventures of a Guinea</i>, v. 275, n. 2.
JOHNSON, D., i. 79, n. 2.
JOHNSON, Elizabeth (Dr. Johnson's wife, H. Porter's widow,
maiden name Jarvis or Jervis), i. 86, n. 1;
  account of her, i. 95;
  her age, i. 95, n. 2;
  character, i. 241, n. 4;
  death, i. 203, n. 1, 234;
  epitaph, i. 241, n. 2;
  Ford's ghost, iii. 349;
  Garrick's mimicry of her, i. 99;
  Hampstead lodgings, i. 192;
  indulgencies, i. 238;
  Johnson's conversation, admires, i. 95;
  lodgings in her last illness, iv. 377, n. 1;
  marriage, i. 95; ii. 77;
  marriage-settlement, i. 95, n. 3;
  personal appearance, i. 95, 99; 238;
  <i>Rambler</i>, admiration of the, i. 210;
  <i>Tetty</i> or <i>Tetsey</i>, i. 98; ii. 77;
  wedding-ring, i. 237;
  mentioned, i. 488, 500; iii. 46.
  See JOHNSON, wife.
JOHNSON, Fisher, and his sons (Johnson's cousins), iv. 402, n. 2.
JOHNSON, 'the gigantick,' i. 388, n. 3.
JOHNSON, Hester (<i>Stella</i>), iv. 177, n. 2; v. 243.
JOHNSON, the horse-rider, i. 399; iii. 231.
JOHNSON, Michael (Johnson's father),
  account of him, i. 34-7;
  accompanies his son to Oxford, i. 59;
  bankrupt, i. 78-9; iv. 402, n. 2;
  book-trade, i. 36;
  Chester fair, at, v. 435;
  death, i. 80;
  disapproved of tea, i. 313, n. 2;
  epitaph, i. 79, n. 2; iv. 393;
  excise prosecution, i. 36, n. 5;
  fire in the parlour on Sunday, v. 60;
  'foolish old man,' i. 40;
  house, his, iv. 372, n. 2;
  Jacobite, a, i. 37;
  marriage register, i. 35, n. 1;
  melancholy, i. 35;
  oath of abjuration, signs the, ii. 322;
  observer, no careless, i. 34, n. 5;
  sheriff of Lichfield, i. 36, n. 4;
  Uttoxeter market, at, iv. 373.
JOHNSON, Mr., in Blackmore's <i>Lay Monastery</i>, v. 384, n. 2.
JOHNSON, Nathanael (Johnson's younger brother),
  complains of his brother, i. 90, n. 3;
  death, i. 35, 90, n. 3;
  epitaph, ib.; iv. 393;
  letter from him, i. 90, n. 3;
  succeeds his father, i. 90.
JOHNSON, Samuel, Rev., i. 135.
JOHNSON, SAMUEL, CHIEF EVENTS OF His LIFE.
(For his publications see also i. 16-24; for a complete list of his
travels and visits, iii. 450-3;  and for his residences, iii. 405, n. 6.)
  1709  Birth, i. 34.
  1712  'Touched  by Queen Anne, i. 43.
  1716  (about) Enters Lichfield School, i. 43.
  1725  Enters Stourbridge School, i. 49.
  1726  Returns home, i. 50.
  1728  Enters Pembroke College, i. 58.
        Translates Pope's <i>Messiah</i>, i. 61.
  1729  Returns home, i. 78, n. 2.
  1731  Death of his father, i. 80.
  1732  Usher at Market Bosworth, i. 84.
  1733  At Birmingham, i. 85, 86, n. 1.
  1734  Returns to Lichfield, i. 89.
        Publishes proposals for printing <i>Politian</i>, i. 90.
        Returns to Birmingham, i. 90.
        Offers to write for the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. i. 91.
  1735  Publishes <i>Lobo's Abyssinia</i>, i. 87.
        Marries Mrs. Porter and opens a school at Edial, i. 95, n. 2, 96.
  1737  Visits London with Garrick, i. 101.
        Returns to Lichfield and finishes <i>Irene</i>, i. 107.
        Removes to London, i. 110.
  1738  Becomes a writer in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. i. 113.
        <i>London</i>, i. 118.
        Begins to translate Father Paul Sarpi's <i>History</i>, i. 135.
        <i>Life of Father Paul Sarpi</i>, i. 139.
  1739  Seeks the Mastership of Appleby School and the degree of
Master of Arts, i. 132-3.
        <i>Life of Boorhaave</i>, i. 140.
        <i>Marmor Norfolciense</i>, i. 141.
  1740  <i>Lives of Blake, Drake, and Barretier</i>, i. 147.
        Begins to write the <i>Debates</i>, i. 150.
  1741  <i>Debates</i>, i. 150.
  1742  <i>Debates</i>, i. 150.
        <i>Lives of Barman and Sydenham</i>, i. 153.
        <i>Proposals for printing Bibliotheca Harleiana</i>, i. 153.
  1743  Finishes the Debates, i. 150.
  1744  Life of Savage, i. 161.
  1745  <i>Miscellaneous Observations on Macbeth</i>, i. 175.
        Sketching outlines of his Dictionary, i. 176, 182, n. 3.
  1746  Gets to know Levett, i. 243.
  1747  <i>Prologue on the opening of Drury Lane Theatre</i>, i. 181.
        <i>Plan for a Dictionary of the English Language</i>, i. 182.
  1748  Writing the <i>Dictionary</i>.
        <i>Life of Roscommon</i>, i. 192.
        <i>The Vision of Theodore the Hermit</i>, i. 192.
  1749  Writing the <i>Dictionary</i>.
        <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>, i. 192.
        <i>Irene</i> acted, i. 196.
        Forms the Ivy Lane Club, i. 190, n. 5.
        Living in Gough Square, iii. 405, n. 6.
  1750  Writing the <i>Dictionary</i>.
        Begins the <i>Rambler</i>, i. 201.
        _Prologue for the benefit of Milton's Grand-daughter, i. 227.
  1751  Writing the <i>Dictionary</i>.
        <i>The Rambler</i>.
        Lauder's fraud exposed, i. 228.
        <i>Life of Cheynel</i>, i. 228.
  1752  Writing the <i>Dictionary</i>.
        Ends <i>The Rambler</i>, i. 203.
        Death of his wife, i. 234.
        Miss Williams begins to reside with him, i. 232.
        Gets to know Reynolds, i. 245, n. 1.
  1753  Writing the <i>Dictionary</i>.
        Writes for <i>The Adventurer</i>, i. 252.
  1754  Writing the <i>Dictionary</i>.
        <i>Life of Cave</i>, i. 256.
        Visits Oxford, i. 270.
        Gets to know Murphy, i. 356, n. 2.
  1755  Letter to Lord Chesterfield, i. 261.
        Becomes an M.A. of Oxford, i. 281.
        Publishes the <i>Dictionary</i>, i. 291.
        Projects a Biblithèque, i. 284.
        Gets to know Langton (about this year), i. 247, n. 1.
  1756  Publishes an abridgement of the <i>Dictionary</i>, i. 305.
        Writes for <i>The Universal Visitor</i>, i. 306.
        Superintends and writes for <i>The Literary Magazine</i>, i. 307.
        <i>Life of Sir Thomas Browne</i>, i. 308.
        <i>Proposals for an edition of Shakespeare</i>, i. 318.
  1757  Writes for the <i>Literary Magazine</i>, i. 320.
        Editing <i>Shakespeare</i>, i. 496, n. 3.
  1758  Editing <i>Shakespeare</i>, i. 496, n. 3.
        Begins <i>The Idler</i>, i. 330.
        Gets to know Dr. Burney, i. 328.
  1759  <i>The Idler</i>, i. 330.
        Death of his mother, i. 339.
        <i>Rasselas</i>, i. 340.
        Leaves Gough Square and goes into chambers, i. 350, n. 3;
iii. 405, n. 6.
        Visits Oxford, i. 347.
        Gets to know Beauclerk, i. 248, n. 4.
  1760  Ends <i>The Idler</i>, i. 330.
        Perhaps editing <i>Shakespeare</i>, i. 353.
        In Inner Temple Lane, iii. 405, n. 6.
  1761  Visits Lichfield in the winter of 1761-2, i. 370.
  1762  Pensioned, i. 372.
        Trip to Devonshire, i. 377.
        Cock Lane Ghost imposture exposed, i. 406.
  1763  Gets to know Boswell, i. 391.
        Trip to Harwich, i. 464.
        Visits Oxford, iii. 451.
        <i>Character of Collins</i>, i. 382.
        <i>Life of Ascham</i>, i. 464.
  1764  Visits Langton in Lincolnshire, i. 476.
        Literary Club founded, i. 477.
         Visits Dr. Percy at Easton Maudit, i. 486.
  1765   Visits Cambridge, i. 487.
         Becomes an LL.D. of Dublin, i. 488.
         Suffers from a severe illness, i. 483, 520.
         Gets to know the Thrales (either this year or in 1764),
i. 490, 520.
        Engages in politics with W. G. Hamilton, i. 489.
        Publishes his <i>Shakespeare</i>, i. 496.
        Takes a house in Johnson's Court, ii. 5; iii. 405, n. 6.
  1766  Contributes to Mrs. Williams's <i>Miscellanies</i>, ii. 25.
        Spends more than three months at Streatham, ii. 25.
        Visits Oxford, ii. 25.
  1767  Interview with the King, ii. 33.
        Spends near six months in Lichfield, ii. 30.
  1768  <i>Prologue to the Good-Natured Man</i>. ii. 45.
        Visits Oxford, iii. 452.
  1769  Appointed Professor in Ancient Literature to the Royal Academy,
ii. 67.
        Visits Oxford, Lichfield and Ashbourne, ii. 67; iii. 452.
        Visits Brighton, ii. 68.
        Appears as a witness at Baretti's trial, ii. 96.
  1770  <i>The False Alarm</i>, ii. 111.
        Visits Lichfield and Ashbourne, iii. 452.
  1771  <i>Falkland's Islands</i>, ii. 134.
        Revises the <i>Dictionary</i>, ii. 143, n. 3.
        Visits Lichfield and Ashbourne, ii. 141.
  1772  Revises the <i>Dictionary</i>, ii. 143, n. 3.
        Visits Lichfield and Ashbourne, iii. 452.
  1773  Publishes the fourth edition of the <i>Dictionary</i>, ii. 203.
        Attempts to learn the Low Dutch language, ii. 263.
        Tour of Scotland, ii. 266; v. 1.
        Visits Oxford, ii. 268.
        Begins his <i>Journey to the Western Islands</i>, ii. 268.
  1774  Death of Goldsmith, ii. 279, n. 2.
        Tour to North Wales, ii. 285; v. 427.
        Visits Burke at Beaconsfield, ii. 285, n. 3; v. 460.
        <i>The Patriot</i>, ii. 286.
        Finishes his <i>Journey to the Western Islands</i>, ii. 288.
  1775  Publishes his <i>Journey to the Western Islands</i>, ii. 300.
        <i>Taxation no Tyranny</i>, ii. 312.
        Becomes an LL.D. of Oxford, ii. 331.
        Visits Oxford, Lichfield and Ashbourne, ii. 381; iii. 452.
        Tour to France, ii. 384.
  1776  Visits Oxford, Lichfield, and Ashbourne with Boswell, ii. 438.
        Projected tour to Italy abandoned, iii. 6.
        Visits Bath, iii. 44.
        First dinner with Wilkes, iii. 64.
        Visits Brighton, iii. 92.
  1777  Engages to write <i>The Lives of the Poets</i>, iii. 109.
        Exerts himself in behalf of Dr. Dodd, iii. 139.
        Meets Boswell at Ashbourne, iii. 135.
  1778  Writing <i>The Lives of the Poets</i>, iii. 360.
        Visits Warley Camp, iii. 360.
  1779  Publishes the first four volumes of the <i>Lives</i>, iii. 370.
        Writing the last six volumes, ib.
        Death of Garrick, iii. 371.
        Visits Lichfield and Ashbourne, iii. 395.
  1780  Writing the last six volumes of the <i>Lives</i>, iii. 418.
        Death of Beauclerk, iii. 420.
        Visits Brighton, iii. 453.
  1781  Publishes the last six volumes of the <i>Lives</i>, iv. 34.
        Death of Thrale. iv. 84.
        Second dinner with Wilkes, iv. 101.
        Visits Southill, iv. 118.
        Visits Oxford, Birmingham, Lichfield, and Ashbourne, iv. 135.
  1782  Death of Levett, iv. 137.
        Visits Oxford, iv. 151.
        Takes leave of Streatham, iv. 158.
        Visits Brighton, iv. 159.
  1783  Has a stroke of the palsy, iv. 227.
        Visits Rochester, iv. 233.
        Visits Heale, iv. 234.
        Death of Mrs. Williams, iv. 235.
        Threatened with a surgical operation, iv. 239.
        Founds the Essex Head Club, iv. 253.
        Attacked by spasmodic asthma, iv. 255.
  1784  Confined by illness for 129 days, iv. 270, n. 1.
        Visits Oxford with Boswell, iv. 283.
        Projected tour to Italy, iv. 326.
        Mrs. Thrale's second marriage, iv. 339.
        Visits Lichfield, Ashbourne, Birmingham, and Oxford, iv. 353-377.
        Death of Allen, iv. 354.
        Death, iv. 417.
JOHNSON, Samuel,
  abbreviations of his friends' names, ii. 258; iv. 273, n. 1;
  Aberdeen, freeman of, v. 90;
  abodes, list of his: see JOHNSON, habitations;
  absence of mind: see JOHNSON, peculiarities;
  abstinence  easy to him, i. 103, n. 3, 468; iv. 72, 149, n. 3;
  absurd stories told of him, i. 464;
  abused in a newspaper, iv. 29;
  accounts, resolves to keep, iv. 177, n. 3;
  acquaintance, making new, iv. 374; ib., n. 4;
    widely-varied, iii. 21 (see JOHNSON, society);
  actors: see PLAYERS;
  <i>Adversaria</i>, i. 205;
  'agreeable, extremely,' ii. 141, n. 3;
  alchymy, not a positive unbeliever in, ii. 376;
  alertness, no, v. 308;
  <i>Alfred, Life of</i>, projects a, i. 177;
  alms-giving, i. 302, n. 1; ii. 119;
  ambition, iii. 309;
  Americans, feelings towards the: see AMERICA;
  amused, easily, ii. 261; v. 249;
  amusements, his, iii. 398;
  ancestors, asked in the Highlands about his, v. 237, n. 2;
  [Greek: Anax andron], i. 47;
  anecdotes, love of: see ANECDOTES;
  <i>Annales</i>: see JOHNSON, diary;
  annihilation, horror of, iii. 295, 298, n. 1;
  anniversaries, observed, i. 483;
  anxiety about his writings, felt no, iii. 33;
  apology, ready to make an, iv. 321,409, n. 1, 431;
  <i>Apophthegms</i>, i. 190, n. 4;
  Appius, compared by Burke to, iv. 374, n. 2;
  Appleby School, applies for mastership of, i. 132;
  apprentice, talking to an, ii. 323;
  approbation, pleasure of, iv. 255, n. 2;
  Arabic, wishes to study, iv. 28;
  architecture and statuary, opinion of, ii. 439;
  arguing before an audience, iii. 331; iv. 111, 324, 429;
    Burke refers to it, iii. 24, n. 2;
    butt end of the pistol, ii. 100; iv. 274; v. 292;
    delight in it, ii. 452, n. 1;
    described by Burke, iv. 316, n. 1;
      Hamilton, iv. iii;
      Reynolds, ii. 100, n. 1; iii. 81, n. 1;
      Seaford, Lord, iv. 176, n. 1;
    either side indifferently, ii. 105; iii. 24;
    kick of the Tartar horse, ii. 100, n. 1;
    promptitude for it, ii. 365; iii. 24, n. 1;
    reasoned close or wide, iv. 429; v. 17;
    rudeness, iii. 81, n. 1;
    spirit of contradiction, v. 83, 222;
    thinking which side he should take, iii. 24;
    wrong side, on the, iii. 23; iv. iii, 429;
    see JOHNSON, talk;
  Argyll Street, room in, iv. 158, n. 4;
  <i>Armiger</i>, i. 489; ii. 332, n. i;
  art: see PAINTING;
  art of making people talk of what they know best, v. 130;
  assertions, love of contradicting, i. 410, n. 2; iii. 24, n. 2;
  attacked in the streets, ii. 299;
  attacks, never but once replied to, i. 314;
    enjoyed them, ii. 308, 363; iv. 55;
    looked on them as part of his consequence, iv. 422; v. 400, n. 4:
    see ATTACKS;
  attendance, required the least, ii. 474, n. 3;
iv. 181, n. 1, 340, n. 3; v. 309, n. 2;
  Auchinleck, hopes again to see, iv. 156, 264;
  auction of his effects, i. 363, n. 3;
  austere, but not morose, ii. 122;
  author, an, without pen, ink, or paper, i. 350, n. 3;
  authors asking his opinion: see AUTHORS;
  autobiography, projects his, i. 26, n. 1;
  awe, admiration, love, regarded with, v. 272;
  awe of him, felt by Aberdeen professors, v. 92;
    Lord B——, iv. 116, n. 1;
    Englishmen of great eminence, iii. 85;
    Fox, iii. 267;
    at Mrs. Garrick's, iv. 99;
    by Glasgow professors, v. 371;
    at Allan Ramsay's, iii. 332;
    by Dr. Robertson, v. 371;
    by Scotch <i>literati</i>, ii. 63;
    by a Welsh parson, v. 450, n. 2;
    described, by Mdme. D'Arblay, v. 371, n. 2:
    see below, JOHNSON, feared;
  <i>Bacon, Life of</i>, projects a, iii. 194;
  ball, goes to a, iv. 159, n. 3;
  Baltic, wishes to go up the, ii. 288, n. 3; iii. 134, 454;
  bargainer, bad,
    <i>Rasselas</i>, i. 341;
    <i>Lives of the Poets</i>, iii. 111, n. 1;
  Barry's picture, introduced in, iv. 224, n. 1;
  beadle within him, the, iii. 81;
  bear, a,
    Boswell's bear, ii. 269, n. i; v. 39, n. 4;
    dancing bear, ii. 66;
    Gibbon's sarcasm, ii. 348:
    <i>He-bear</i>, iv. 113, n. 2;
    'like a word in a catch,' ii. 347;
    'nothing of the bear but his skin,' ii. 66;
    <i>Ursa Major</i>, v. 384;
  beats Osborne, the bookseller, i. 154;
  'beat many a fellow,' i. 154, n. 2;
  belabours his confessor, iv. 281:
  belief, angry at attacks on his, iii. 111;
  'believes nothing <i>but</i> the Bible,' i. 147, n. 2;
  benevolence, iii. 124, 222, 306, 368; iv. 278, 283;
    to an outcast woman, iv. 321;
    concealed, iv. 325;
  Bible, reads the whole, ii. 189, n. 3;
    reads the Greek Testament at 160 verses every Sunday, ii. 288;
  bigotry, freedom  from it, i. 405; ii. 150; iii. 188; iv. 410-1;
   instance of it, v. 114, n. 2;
  <i>Biographia Britannica</i>, asked to edit the, iii. 174;
  biography, excellence  in, i. 25, 256;
    love of it: see BIOGRAPHY;
  <i>Birmingham Journal</i>, writes for the, i. 85;
  birth and rank, respect for, ii. l30, l53, 26l, 328; v. 103, 353;
  birth and parentage, i. 34;
  birth-day, disliked mention  of his, at Ashbourne, iii. 157;
    at Dunvegan, v. 222;
    escaped from Streatham on it, iii. 398, n. 1;
    cheerful entry in 1780, iii. 440;
    gave a dinner on it in 1781, iii. 157, n. 3; iv. l35. n. 1;
    in 1783, iv. 239, n. 2;
    reflected on it, v. 457;
    kept at Streatham, iii. 157, n. 3;
  bishop, looks like a, v. 363;
  bleeding, undergoes, iii. 104, 152, n. 3;
  blood, irritability of his, iv. 190;
  blushing, iii. 329;
  Bolt-court, house—ii. 427;
    drawing-room, iii. 316;
    kitchen, iii. 461;
    prints in his dining-room, iv. 202, n. 1;
    silver salvers, iv. 92;
    garden, ii. 427, n. 1; iii. 398;
    stone-seats, iv. 203;
    Boswell in it for the last time, iv. 337:
    see JOHNSON, household;
  bones, horror at, v. 169, 327;
  books, bidding them farewell, iv. 359;
    judgment as to their success, iv. 121;
    loan of them, iv. 371, n. 2;
    runs to them, ii. 365;
    tears out their heart, iii. 284;
    uses them slovenly, ii. 192:
    see BOOKS, and JOHNSON, library;
  book-binding, i. 56, n. 2;
  booksellers, in a company of, iii. 311;
  borrowed small sums, iv. 191;
  BOSWELL: see BOSWELL and JOHNSON, letters;
  bow to an Archbishop, iv. 198;
  <i>bow-wow</i> way, ii. 326, n. 5; v. 18, n. 1;
  boxing, conversant in the art of, v. 229, n. 2;
  breakfast, i. 243, n. 3; ii. 214, 376; iv. 171;
    <i>in splendour</i>, iii. 400;
  breeding, good, iii. 54, n. 1;
  brother, his pretended, v. 295;
  'buck, a young English,' v. 184, 261;
  buffoonery, incomparable at, ii. 262, n. 2; iii. 24, n. 2;
  bull, made a, iv. 322;
  Burke content to have rung the bell to him, iv. 26-7;
    respect for him, iv. 318;
    attacked by him, v. 15, n. 1:
    see BURKE;
  burlesque, turns a dispute into, iv. 80, n. 4;
  business, love of,
    Clarendon Press, ii. 441;
    Dr. Taylor's law suit, iii. 44, n. 3; 51, n. 3;
    Thrale's brewery, iv. 85, n. 2;
  calculation, fondness for, i. 72; ii. 288-9, 344; iii. 207;
    error in, ib. n. 3;
    forgets to use it, iii. 226, n. 4;
  'Caliban of literature,' ii. 129, 155, n. 2;
  <i>called</i>, iv. 94;
  candour, iv. 192, 239;
  cards, wished he had learnt, iii. 23; v. 404;
  careless of documents, v. 364;
  caricatured, glad to be, v. 400, n. 4;
  cat, Hodge, his, iv. 197;
  catalogue of his works: see JOHNSON, works;
  cathedrals, had seen most of the, iii. 107, 118, 456;
  ceremonies of life, attentive to the, iii. 54, n. 1;
  chambers: see JOHNSON, habitations;
  Chancellor, Lord, might have been, iii. 310;
  character, his,
    drawn by himself, iii. 398, n. 3; iv. 45, 168, n. 2, 239;
    by Baretti, iii. 429, n. 2;
    Boswell, iv. 420, n. 3, 424-30; v. 17-19;
    Burney, Miss, ii. 262, n. 2; iii. 440, n. 1; iv. 245, n. 2, 426, n. 2;
    Dodd, iii. 140, n. 2;
    Hamilton, iv. 420;
    Mickle, iv. 250;
    Parr, iv. 47, n. 2;
    at Ramsay's, iii. 331;
    Reynolds: see REYNOLDS, Johnson;
    Robertson, iii 331-2;
    Taylor, iii. 150;
    Towers, iv. 41, n. 1;
    like Baker's character of James I, v. 12;
    Bayle's of Menage, iv. 428, n. 2;
    Boerhaave's, iv. 430, n. 1;
    Clarendon's character of Falkland, iv. 428, n. 2;
    Dryden's, i. 264, n. 1; iv. 45;
    Harington's of Bishop Still, iv. 420, n. 3;
    Milton's, i. 97, n. 2, 131, n. 2, 199, n. 3;
    Savage's, i. 166, n. 4;
  character, said by Baretti to be ignorant of, v. 17, n. 2;
  characters, saw a great variety, iii. 20;
    drew strong yet nice portraits, ib.;
    too much in light and shade, ii. 306;
    overcharged, iii. 332;
  charity to the poor, iv. 132, 191:
    see JOHNSON, Almsgiving;
  <i>Charles of Sweden</i>, i. 153, n. 4;
  chastity in his youth, i. 94;
    Savage's example, i. 164; iv. 395-7;
  chemistry, love of, i. 140, 436; iii. 398; iv. 237;
  chief, would have made a good, v. 136, 143;
  child, never wished to have a, iii. 29;
  childhood, companions of his, iii. 131;
  children, books for, iv. 8, n. 3;
  children, love of little, iv. 196;
  Christianity, projected work on, v. 89;
  church,
    attendances due at, i. 67, n. 2; iii. 401;
    behaviour in it, ii. 214;
    lateness in arriving at it, ii. 476; iii. 302, n. 1, 313, n, 1;
    perturbation, without, at it, ii. 476;
    some radiations of comfort at it, iii. 17, n. 2, 25, n. l;
    reluctance to go to it, i. 67; ii. 142, n. 2, 214, n. 2;
    resolutions at it, i. 500;
  Church of England, devotion to the, iii. 331; iv. 426; v. 17;
  church preferment, offer of, i. 320, 476; ii. 120;
  civilized life in the Hebrides, longs for, v. 183;
  clergymen should not be taught elocution, iv. 206;
  Clerkenwell ale-house, i. 113, n. 1;
  climb over a wall at Oxford, proposes to, i. 348;
  Club, Literary, attendance, i. 480, n. 2; ii. 136; iii. 106, n. 4;
    dislike of some of the members, iii. 106;
    One of the founders, i. 477;
  coach, on the top of a, i. 477;
  cold, indifferent to, v. 306, 345;
  colloquial barbarisms, repressed, iii. 196;
  comfort, wants every, iv. 270;
  common things, well-informed in, iv. 206;
  'companion, a tremendous,' iii. 139;
  companions of his youth, regrets the, iii. 180, n. 3;
  company, loves, i. 144;
    obliged to any man who visits him, i. 397;
    proud to have his company desired, ii. 375, n. 4;
    tries to persuade people to return, i. 490;
  complaints, not given to, ii. 67, 357; iii. 3; iv. 116,172, n. 4;
  complaisance, i. 82;
  compliment, pleased with a, iv. 275; v. 401;
  composition,
    dictionary-making and poetry compared, v. 47, 418;
    fair copies, never wrote, i. 71, n. 3; iii. 62, n. 1; iv. 36, 309;
    <i>Johnsonese</i>, v. 145, n. 2;
    reviewing, iv. 214;
    time for it, ii. 119;
    verses, counting his, iv. 219;
    wrote by fits and starts, iv. 369;
      only for money, i. 318, n. 5; iii. 19, n. 3;
      not for pleasure, iv. 219;
      rapidity, described by Courtenay, iv. 381, n. 1;
      shown in his college exercises, i. 71;
    <i>Debates</i>, i. 504;
    <i>Hermit of Teneriffe</i>, i. 192, n. 1;
    <i>Idler</i>, i. 331;
    <i>Life of Savage</i>, forty-eight pages at a sitting, i. 166; v. 67;
    <i>Ramblers</i>, i. 203;
    <i>Rasselas</i>, i. 341;
    sermons, v. 67;
    translation from the French, iv. 127; v. 67;
    <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>, i. 192; ii. 15;
  confidence in his own abilities, i. 186;
  conjecture, kept things floating in, iii. 324;
  conscience, tenderness of his, i. 152;
  consecrated ground, reverence for, v. 62, 170;
  constant to those he employed, iv. 319;
  Constantinople, wish to go to, iv. 28;
  constitution, strength of his, iv. 256, n. 3;
  <i>Construction of Fireworks</i>, v. 246, n. 1;
  contraction of his friends' names, ii. 258; v. 308;
  contradiction, actuated by its spirit, iii. 66; v. 387;
    exasperated by it, ii. 122;
    pleasure in it, in. 24;
  conversation, antique statue, like an, iii. 317;
    Bacon's precept, in conformity with, iv. 236;
    colloquial pleasantry, iv. 428;
    contest, a, ii. 450; iv. 111;
    described by Hogarth, i. 147, n. 2;
    Dr. King, ii. 95, n. 1;
    E. Dilly, iii. 110;
    Reynolds, iv. 184;
    Malone, ib. n. 2;
    Miss Burney and Mrs. Thrale, iv. 237, n. 1;
    Macaulay, ib.;
    Mrs. Piozzi, iv. 346;
    Boswell, ib.;
    elegant as his writing, ii. 95, n. 2; iv. 236, 428;
    essential requisite for it, in want of an, iv. 166;
    exact precision, ii. 434;
    happiest kind, his view of the, iv. 50;
    imaginary victories gained over him, iv. 168, n. 1;
    labours when he says a good thing, v. 77;
    'literature in it, very little,' v. 307;
    'music to hear him speak,' v. 246;
    old man in it, nothing of the, iii. 336;
    originality, iv. 421, n. 1;
    point and imagery, teemed with, iii. 260;
    rule to talk his best, i. 204;
    'runts, would learn to talk of,' iii. 337;
    seldom started a subject, iii. 307, n. 2; iv. 304, n. 4;
    stunned people, v. 288;
    too strong for the great, iv. 117;
    witnesses, without, iii. 81, n. 1;
  conviviality in the Hebrides, v. 261;
  convulsions in his breast, iii. 397, n. 1;
  convulsive starts: see Peculiarities;
  cookery, judge of, i. 469; iii. 285;
    projected book on it, iii. 285;
  copper coins bearing his head, iv. 421, n. 2;
  cottage in Boswell's park, would like a, iv. 226;
  country life, knowledge of, iii. 450;
    mental imprisonment, iv. 338;
    pleasure in it, v. 439, n. 2;
  courage, anecdotes of his, ii. 298-9;
  Court of Justice, in a, ii. 96, 97, n. 1, 98;
  <i>Cowley</i>, projected edition of, iii. 29;
  credulity, iii. 331; iv. 426; v. 17;
  critic upon characters and manners, iii. 48;
  croaker, no, iv. 381, n. 1;
  Cromwell, projected <i>Life</i> of, iv. 235;
  curiosity, his, i. 89; iii. 450, 453-8;
    about the middle ages, iv. 133;
  dance, at a Highland, v. 166;
  dancing, iv. 79, 80, n. 2;
  dating letters, i. 122, n. 2;
  day, mode of spending his, i. 398; ii. 118;
  death, dread of, ii. 106; iii. 153, 295; iv. 253, n. 4, 259, 278, 280,
289, 299-300, 366, 394-5. 399-400; v. 380;
    no dread of what might occasion, ii. 298;
    dying with a grace,' iv. 300, n. 1;
    horror of the last, i. 331, n. 7; iii. 153, n. 2;
    keeping away the thoughts of, ii. 93; iii. 157;
    news of deaths fills him with melancholy, iv. 154;
    resigned at the end, iv. 414, n. 2, 416-9;
  death, his, Dec. 13, 1784, iv. 417-9;
    agitated the public mind, i. 26, n. 2;
    produced a chasm, iv. 420;
    a kind of era, iv. 421, n. 1;
    described by Boswell, iv. 399-419;
    David Boswell, iv. 417;
    Dr. Burney, iv. 410, n. 1;
    Miss Burney, iv. 377, n. 1, 438-9;
    Hoole, iv. 399, n. 1, 406, 410, n. 2;
    Langton, iv. 407, 418, n. 1;
    Nichols, iv. 407-10;
    Reynolds, iv. 414, n. 2;
    Windham's servant, iv. 418;
    spirit of the grammarian, iv. 401;
    characteristical manner shows itself, iv. 411;
    lines on a spendthrift, iv. 413;
    three requests of Reynolds, ib.;
    refuses opiates and sustenance, iv. 415;
      operates on himself, iv. 399, 415. n. 1, 418, n. 1;
  debate, chose the wrong side in a, i. 441;
  debts in 1751, i. 238, n. 2, 350, n. 3;
    in 1759 and 1760, i. 350, n. 3;
    under arrest, i. 303, n. 1;
  dedications, skill in, ii. 1; 224-5;
    never used them himself, i. 257, n. 2; ii. i, n. 2;
    to him, iv. 421, n. 2;
  defending a man, mode of, ii. 87;
  deference, required, iii. 24, n. 2;
  delicacy about his letter to Chesterfield, i. 260, n. 3;
    about Beauclerk, iv. 180;
    towards a dependent, ii. 155;
  depression of mind, i. 297, 358, n. 5;
  deserted, very much, iv. 140;
  '<i>déterré</i>,' i. 129;
  dexterity in retort, iv. 185;
  Diaries, <i>Annales</i>, i. 74, 89, n. 3;
  <i>Diary</i>, burnt, i. 25, 35, n. 1, 251; iv. 405;
    fragments preserved, i. 27, 35. n. 1, 74; iv. 405, n. 2;
v. 53, 427, n. 1;
    Boswell, seen by, i. 251, n. 3; iv. 405;
    left in his house, v. 53;
  'Dictionary Johnson,' i. 385;
  <i>Dictionary</i>, cites himself in his, iv. 4, n. 3:
    see also under <i>Dictionary</i>;
  <i>Dies irae</i>, reciting the, iii. 358, n. 3;
  diffidence, i. 153;
  Dignity, 'a blunt dignity about him,' i. 461, n. 4;
    of character, i. 131, 264, n. 1; ii. 118; v. 103;
    of literature, iii. 310;
  dinners, 'dinner to ask a man to,' i. 470;
    house, at his own, ii. 215, 360, 375, 427, n. 1; iii. 241;
iv. 92, 210;
    to members of the Ivy Lane Club, iv. 436;
    'huffed his wife' about, i. 239, n. 2;
    on the way to Oxford, iv. 284;
    one in Devonshire, i. 379, n. 2;
    at the Pine Apple, i. 103;
    talked about them more than he thought, i. 469, n. 2;
    thought on them with earnestness, i. 467, n. 2; v. 342, n. 2:
    see under DINNERS, and JOHNSON, eating;
  discrimination, fond of, ii. 306; iii. 282;
  disorderly habits, i. 482, n. 2; iv. 110;
  dissenters  and snails, ii. 268, n, 2;
  distilling, iv. 9;
  distressed by poverty, i. 73, 77, 121, 123, n. 2, 133, 137, 163,
238, n. 2, 303, 350, 488;
  Doctor of Laws of Dublin, i. 488;
    Oxford, ii. 318, n. 1, 331-3;
    did not use the title, i. 488, n. 3; ii. 332, n. 1; iv. 79, n. 3,
268; v. 37, n. 2;
  dogs, separated two: see JOHNSON, fear;
  <i>Domine</i>, title of, i. 488, n. 3;
    'an auld dominie,' v. 382, n. 2;
  dramatic power, i. 506: see JOHNSON, tragedy-writer;
  draughts, played at, i. 317; ii. 444;
  dress, described by Beauclerk, ii. 406;
    Boswell, i. 396; v. 18;
    Colman, iii. 54, n. 2;
    Cumberland, iii. 325, n. 3;
    Foote, ii. 403;
    Langton, i. 247;
    Miss Reynolds, i. 246, n. 2, 328, n. 1;
    improved, iii. 325;
    on his tour in Scotland, v. 19;
    Boswell suggests for him velvet and embroidery, ii. 475;
    Court mourning, at a, iv. 325;
    dramatic author, as a, i. 200; v. 364;
    when visiting Goldsmith, i. 366, n. 1;
    in Paris, ii. 403, n. 5;
  dropsy, sudden relief from, iv. 271-2;
    operated on himself for it: see above, under death;
  Easter meetings with Boswell, iv. 148, n. 2;
  Easter-day, his placidity on it, iii. 25;
    resolutions on it, i. 483, 487; ii. 189, n. 3; iii. 99;
  East-Indian affairs, had never considered, ii. 294;
  eating, dislikes being asked twice to eat anything, v. 264;
    love of good eating, i. 467; iii. 69;
    at Monboddo's table, v. 81;
    mode, i. 267, 468, 470, n. 2; v. 206;
    unaffected by kinds of food, iii. 305;
    voracious, iv. 72, 330; v. 20;
  enemies, wonders why he has, iv. 168;
  envy, candid avowal of, iii 271, n. 2;
    possible envy of Burke, iii. 310, n. 4;
  epitaphs, his, iv. 424, ib., n. 2, 443-5;
    on his wife, i. 241, n. 2; iv. 351-2;
    on his parents and brothers, iv. 393;
  Essex Head Club, founds the, iv. 253-5, 275, 436-8;
  etymologist, a bad, i. 186, n. 5;
  evidence, a sifter of, i. 406; v. 388;
  evil spirit, the, affects Johnson politically, v. 36, n. 3;
  exaggeration, hatred of: see EXAGGERATION;
  excellence described by Mrs. Piozzi, ii. 263, n. 6;
  executor, Porter's, i. 95, n. 3;
    Thrale's, iv. 86;
  exhibited, refused to be, ii. 120;
  expedition, eager for an, iii. 131, 134;
  experiments, minute, iii. 398, n. 3;
  eyes: see Sight;
  fable, sketch of a, ii. 232;
  'Faith in some proportion to fear,' iv. 299, n. 3;
  fancy, fecundity of, iii. 317;
  Fasting, ii. 214, n. 1, 352, 435, 476; iii. 24, 300; iv. 203, 397;
    fasted two days, i. 469; iii. 306; v. 284;
  fear, a stranger to, ii. 298, n. 4;
    separated two dogs, ii. 299; v. 329;
    never afraid of any man, iv. 327, n. 4;
    afraid to walk on the roof of the Observatory, ii. 389;
  feared at College, iii. 303;
    at Brighton, iv. 159, n. 3;
    by Langton, iv. 295: see above, JOHNSON, awe;
  Fearing in <i>Pilgrim's Progress</i>, like, ii. 298, n. 4; iv. 417, n. 2;
  female charms, sensible to, i. 92;
  female dress, critical of, i. 41;
  feudal notions, iii. 177;
  fictions, projected work on, iv. 236;
  fields, wishes to see the, iii. 435, n. 3, 441-2;
  flattery, somewhat susceptible of, iv. 427; v. 17, 440, n. 2;
  <i>foenum habet in cornu</i>, ii. 79;
  Foote describes him in Paris, ii. 403;
  foreigners, prejudice against, i. 129; iv. 15;
    described by Baretti and Reynolds, ib. n. 3, 169, n. 1;
    Boswell, v. 20:
  forgiving disposition, ii. 270; iv. 349, n. 2;
    shown to one who exceeded in wine, ii. 436; iv. 110; v. 259, n. 1;
  fortitude, iv. 240, 3 4;
  fox-hunting, i. 446, n. 1; v. 253;
  France, tour to, ii. 384-404;
    diary, ii. 389-401;
      would not publish it, iii. 301;
  French, knowledge of, i. 115; ii. 81-2, 208, n. 2, 385, 404;
    writes a French letter, ii. 404;
  fretful, iv. 170, 173, 283;
  friends, list of, in 1752, i. 241;
  friend, a most active, iv. 344;
  <i>frisk</i>, his, i. 250;
  frolic, his bitterness mistaken for, i. 73; iv. 304;
  fruit, love of, iv. 353; v. 455, n. 3;
  funeral, iv. 419, 439;
  Garagantua, iii. 255;
  garret in Gough Square, i. 328;
  Garrick's success, moved by, i. 167, 216, n. 2; ii. 69;
  gay and good-humoured, iii. 440, n. 1; iv. 101, n. 1;
    'infinitely agreeable,' iv. 305, n. 1;
    bland and gay, v. 398;
    gay circles of life, pleased at mixing in the, ii. 321, 349;
  <i>Gelaleddin</i>, describes himself in, iv. 195, n. 1;
  general censure, dislikes, iv. 313;
  <i>genius</i>, always in extremes, i. 468, n. 4; iii. 307, n. 2;
  <i>Gentleman's Magazine</i>: see <i>Gentleman's Magazine</i>;
  gentleness, iv. 101, n. 1, 183, n. 2;
    want of it, v. 288;
  gentlewoman in liquor, helps a, ii. 434;
  gesticulating, averse to, iv. 322;
  gestures, see JOHNSON, peculiarities;
  ghost, like a, i. 6, n. 2; iii. 307; v. 73;
  ghosts: see GHOSTS;
  'Giant in his den,' i. 396;
  gloomy cast of thought, i. 180;
  God, love predominated over by fear of, iii. 339;
    'saw God in clouds,' iii. 98;
  Goldsmith, contests with, ii. 231;
    envy, i. 414, n. 4;
    <i>Haunch of Venison</i>, mentioned in, iii. 225, n. 2;
    proposal to review a work by, v. 274:
    see GOLDSMITH;
  Good Friday, would not look at a proof on, iii. 313:
    see JOHNSON, fasting;
  good-humour, iv. 245, n. 2; v. 132, 139;
  'good-humoured fellow,' ii. 362; iii. 78;
  goodnatured, but not good-humoured, ii. 362;
  good in others seen by him, i. 161, n. 2;
  good things of this life, loved the, iii. 310, n. 4;
  good sayings, forgets his, iv. 179;
  Gordon Riots, iii. 428-30;
  gout due to abstinence, i. 103, n. 3:
    see JOHNSON, health;
  gown, Master of Arts, i. 347;
  graces, valued the, iii. 54;
  grandfather, could hardly tell who was his, ii. 261;
  gratitude, i. 487;
  grave, request about it, iv. 393, n. 3;
    in Westminster Abbey, iv. 419;
    close to Macpherson's, ii. 298, n. 2;
  great, never courted the, iii. 189; iv. 116;
    not courted by them, iv. 117, 326;
  'greatest man in England next to Lord Mansfield,' ii. 336; v. 96;
  Greek, knowledge of, i. 57, 70; iii. 90; iv. 8, n. 3, 384-5;
v. 458, n. 5;
  <i>Greek Testament</i>, his large folio, ii. 189;
  Green Room, in the, i. 201; iv. 7;
  grief, bearing, iii. 136, n. 2, 137, n. 1;
  Grosvenor Square, apartment in, iv. 72, n. 1;
  gun, rashness in firing a, ii. 299;
  habitations, list of his, i. 111; iii. 405-6;
  Hampton Court, applies for a residence in, iii. 34, n. 4;
  happier in his later years, i. 299; iv. 1, n. 1;
  happiness not found in this world, iv. 162, n. 2:
    see HAPPINESS;
  hasty, iii. 80-1;
  health, consults Scotch physicians, iv. 261-4;
    seldom a single day of ease, iv. 147;
    1729, hypochondria, i. 63;
    1755, sickness, i. 305;
    1765-6, severe attack of hypochondria, i. 483, 487, 520-2;
          which left a weakness in his knee, v. 318, 446;
    1767, hypochondria, relieved by abstinence, ii. 44, n. 2;
    1768, hypochondria, ii. 45;
          severe illness at Oxford, ii. 46, n. 3;
    1770, rheumatism and spasms, ii. 115, n. 2;
    1771, better, ii. 142, n. 2;
    1773, fever, ii. 263;
          mention of a dreadful illness, ii. 281;
          better in Scotland, v. 45, n. 3, 405, n. 1;
    1774, illness, ii. 272;
    1776, gout, iii. 82, 89;
    1777, hypochondria, iii. 98;
          illness, iii. 210;
    1779, better, iii. 397;
    1780, better, iii. 435, 442; iv. 1, n. 1;
    1781, better, iv. 101, n. 1;
    1782, illness, iv. 141, 142, 144, 149;
    1783, illness, iv. 163;
          palsy, iv. 227, 401, n. 2;
          threatened with an operation, iv. 239;
          gout, 241;
    1783-4, asthma and dropsy, iv. 255, 256, n. 1, 259;
          sudden relief, 261, 271-2;
          confined 129 days, iv. 270, n. 1;
          projected wintering in Italy, iv. 326;
          his letters about his last illness, iv. 353-69;
    <i>Aegri Ephemeris</i>, iv. 381: see JOHNSON, melancholy;
  <i>heard</i>, pronunciation of, iii. 197;
  hearth-broom, his, iv. 134;
  Hebrides, first talk of visiting the, i. 450; ii. 291; v. 286;
    proposed tour, ii. 51, 201, 232, 264; v. 13-4;
    leaves London, ii. 265; v. 21;
    returns, ii. 268;
    account of the tour, ii. 266-7; v. 1-425;
    described in a letter to Taylor, v. 405, n. 1;
    acquisition of ideas, iv. 199;
    and of images, v. 405;
    hardships and dangers, v. 127, 283, n. 1, 313, n. 1, 392;
    uncommon spirit shown, v. 368;
    pleasantest journey he ever made, iii. 93; v. 405;
    pleasure in talking it over, iii. 131, 196;
    a 'frolic,' iv. 136;
    no wish to go again, iv. 199;
    received like princes, v. 317;
    'roving among the Hebrides at sixty,' v. 278;
    box of curiosities from them, ii. 269-70:
    see <i>Journey to the Hebrides</i>, and SCOTLAND;
  Hercules, compared by Boswell to, ii. 260;
  Hervey, story of his ingratitude to, iii. 195, 209-11;
  <i>high</i>, his use of, iii. 118, n. 3;
  Highlander, shows the spirit of a, v. 324;
  hilarity, i. 73, 191, n. 5, 255, n. 1; ii. 261-2, 378;
  history, little regard for: see HISTORY;
  holds up his head as high as he can, iv. 256;
  home uncomfortable by jarrings, iii. 368:
    see JOHNSON, household;
  honest man, v. 264, 309;
  house at Lichfield: see LICHFIELD;
  for his habitations, see JOHNSON, habitations;
  household, account of it, i. 232, n. 1; iii. 461-2; iv. 169, n. 3;
    'much malignity' in it, iii. 417, 461;
    losses by death, iv. 140;
    melancholy, iv. 142;
    more peace, iv. 233, n. 1;
    solitude, i. 232, n. 1; iv. 235, n. 1, 239, 241, 249, 253, n. 4,
255, 270;
    housekeeping, left off, i. 326, 350, n. 3;
    resumed it, ii. 4;
  hug, gives one a forcible, ii. 231;
  humility, iii. 380, n. 3; iv. 410, 427;
  humour, ii. 262, n. 2; iii. 244, n. 2; iv. 428; v. 17, 20;
  hungry only once in his life, i. 469;
  hypochondria: see JOHNSON, health;
  hypocrisy, not suspicious of, i. 418, n. 3; iii. 444;
  Iceland, projected voyage to, i. 242; iv. 358, n. 2;
  idleness in boyhood, i. 48;
    at College, i. 70;
    'Desidiae valedixi,' i. 74;
    in writing  the <i>Plan</i>, i. 183;
    '<i>Idle Apprentice</i> i. 250;
    in Inner Temple lane, i. 350, n. 3;
    'idle fellow all my life,' i. 465;
    idleness in 1760, i. 353;
      in 1761, i. 358;
      in 1763, i. 398;
      in 1764, i. 482;
      in 1767, ii. 44;
      in his latter years, i. 372, n. 1;
      claim upon him for more writings, i. 398; ii. 15, 35, 441;
    idleness exaggerated by himself, i. 446; ii. 263, 271:
    see JOHNSON, indolence;
  ignorance, covered his, v. 124, n. 4;
  illness: see JOHNSON, health;
  imitations of him often caricatures, ii. 326, n. 5;
  'Imlac,' iii. 6;
  <i>Impransus</i>, i. 137;
  incredulity as to particular extraordinary facts, ii. 247; iii. 188;
v. 331;
  '<i>incredulus odi</i>,' iii. 229;
  independence, always asserted his, i. 443;
  indolence, his,
    described by Hawkins, iii. 98, n. 1;
      by Murphy, i. 307, n. 2;
    'inclination to do nothing,' i. 463;
    justification of it, ii. 15, n. 2;
    time of danger, i. 268, n. 4;
  influence, loves, v. 136;
  inheritance from his father, i. 80;
  intoxicated, i. 94, 103, n. 3, 379, n. 2;
    used to slink home, iii. 389;
  '<i>invictum animum Catonis</i>,' iv. 374;
  <i>Irene</i>: see <i>Irene</i>;
  <i>Island Isa</i>, v. 250;
  Islington, for change of air, goes to, iv. 271;
  Italian, knowledge of, i. 115, 156;
    mentions <i>Ariosto</i>, i. 278; v. 368, n. 1;
    <i>Dante</i>, ii. 238;
    purposes vigorous study, iii. 90; iv. 135;
    reads Casa and Castiglione, v. 276;
    <i>Il Palmerino d'Inghilterra</i>, iii. 2;
    Petrarch, iv. 374, n. 5;
    Tasso, iii. 330;
  Italy, projected book on, iii. 19;
    projected tour to, ii. 423, 424, 428;
    tour given up, iii. 6, 18, 27;
    eagerness to go, iii. 19, 28, 36, 456-8; v. 229;
    projected wintering there, iv. 326-8, 336, 338, 348-50;
  Jacobite tendencies, i. 43, 176; ii. 27, 220; iii. 162; iv. 314;
    never ardent in the cause, i. 176, n. 2, 429;
    never in a nonjuring meeting-house, iv. 288;
  James's <i>Medicinal Dictionary</i>, i. 159;
  <i>Jean Bull philosophe</i>, i. 467;
  John Bull, a, v. 20;
  'Johnson's grimly ghost,' iv. 229, n. 4;
  Johnson's Court, house in, ii. 5;
    furniture, ib. n. 1, 376;
  <i>Johnston</i>, often called in Scotland, iii. 106, n. 1; v. 341;
  journal, attempt to keep a, i. 433, n. 2; ii. 217;
  <i>Journey to the Western Islands</i>, see <i>Journey to the Western Islands</i>;
  killing sometimes no murder in a state of nature, v. 87-8;
  kindness, Boswell, to, i. 410;
    Burney's testimony, i. 410, n. 2; iii. 24, n, 2;
    Goldsmith's testimony, i. 417;
    features, shown in his, ii. 141, n. 2;
    poor schoolfellow, to his, ii. 463;
    servants, to, iv. 197;
    small matters, in, iv. 201, 344;
    unthankful, to the, i. 84; iii. 368, 462;
  King's evil, touched for the, i. 42;
  kings, ridicules, i. 333;
  kitchen, his, ii. 215, n. 4; iii. 461;
  knee, takes a young Methodist on his, ii. 120;
    a Highland beauty, v. 261;
  knotting, tried, iii. 242; iv. 284;
  knowledge, at the age of eighteen, i. 445;
    exact, iii. 319;
    varied, iii. 22; iv. 427; v. 215, 246, 263;
  'laboured,' iii. 260, n. 3; v. 77;
  ladies, could be very agreeable to, iv. 73;
  Langton's devotion to him in his illness, iv. 266, n. 3;
    will, ridicules, ii. 261;
  language, delicate in it, iii. 303; iv. 442;
    suits his to a 'blackguard boy,' iv. 184;
    zeal for it, ii. 28;
  large, love of the, v. 442, n. 4;
  late hours, love of, ii. 407; iii. 1, n. 2, 205;
  Latin,
    knowledge of, i. 45, 61, 62;
      testified to by De Quincey, i. 272, n. 3;
      by Dr. Parr, iv. 385, n. 3;
      colloquial, ii. 125, 404, 406;
    misquotes Horace, iv. 356, n. 2;
    modern Latin poetry, loves, i. 90, n. 2;
    verse, translates Greek epigrams into Latin, iv. 384;
  laugh, his, described, ii. 262, n. 2;
    hearty, ii. 378; like a rhinoceros, ib.;
    over small matters, ii. 261; v. 249;
    resounds from Temple Bar to Fleet Ditch, ii. 262;
  'laughter, shakes, out of you,' ii. 231;
  law, knowledge of, iii. 22;
  lawyer, seeks to become a, i. 134;
    would have excelled, ib.;
    had not money, v. 35;
  laxity of talk, i. 476; ii. 735 iv. 211, n. 4; v. 352;
  laziness, trying to cure his, v. 231;
  lectured by Mrs. Thrale, iv. 65, n. 1;
  lemonade, his, v. 22, 72;
  letterwriting an effort, i. 473;
  letters may be published after his death, ii. 60; iii. 276;
    puts as little as possible into them, iv. 102;
    <i>returns not answers</i>, ii. 2, n. 3, 279; iii. 209;
    studied endings, v. 238, n. 6;
    publication by Mrs. Piozzi:
    See under Mrs. Thrale, Johnson,
  letters;—to
    Allen, Edmund, iv. 228;
    Argyle, Duke of, v. 363;
    Astle, Thomas, iv. 133;
    Bagshaw,
    Rev. T., ii. 258; iv. 351;
    Banks, Joseph, ii. 144;
    Barber, Francis, ii. 62, 115, 116; iv. 239, n. 2;
    Baretti, i. 361, 369, 380;
    Barry, James, iv. 202;
    B—d, Mr., ii. 207;
    Beattie, Dr., iii. 434;
    Birch, Dr., i. 160, 226;
    Boothby, Miss, i. 83, n. 2, 305, n. 2; iv. 57, n. 3;
    Boswell, James, i. 473; ii. 3, 20, 58, 70, 110, 140, 145, 201, 204,
264-6, 268, 271-3, 274, 276-7, 278, 279, 284, 287, 288, 290,292, 294,
296, 307, 309, 379, 381-4, 387, 411, 412, 415-424; iii. 44, 86, 88, 93,
94, 104, 105, 108, 120, 124, 127, 130-2, 135, 210, 214, 215, 277, 362,
368, 372, 391, 395, 396, 413, 416, 420, 435, 441; iv. 71, 136, 145, n. 2,
148, 151, 153, 154-6, 163, 231, 241, 248, 259, 261, 262,
264-5, 348, 351, 378-9, 380:
      for Boswell's letters to Johnson, See BOSWELL;
    Boswell, Mrs., iii. 85, 129; iv. 156;
    Boufflers, Mme, de, ii. 405;
    Brocklesby, Dr., iv. 234, 353-9;
    Burney, Dr., i. 286, 323, 327, 500; iv. 239, 360-1, 377;
    Bute, Earl of, i. 376, 380;
    Cave, Edward, i. 91, 107, 120-3, 136-8, I55-7;
    Chamberlain, the Lord, iii. 34, n. 4;
    Chambers, R., i. 274;
    Chapone, Mrs., iv. 247;
    Chesterfield, Earl of, i. 261;
      fictitious one, a, i. 238, n. 3;
    Clark, Alderman, iv. 258;
    clergyman at Bath, iv. 150;
    clergyman, young, iii. 436;
    Cruikshank,——, iv. 365;
    Davies, Thomas, iv. 231, 365;
    Dilly, Charles, iii. 394; iv. 257;
    Dilly, Edward, iii. 126
      (really written to W. Sharp, ib., n. 1);
    Dodd, Dr., iii. 145, 147;
    Drummond, William, ii. 27-31;
    Edwards, Dr., iii. 367;
    Elibank, Lord, v. 182;
    Elphinstone, James, i. 210-2, 236, n. 3; iii. 364, n. 2;
    Farmer, Dr., to, ii. 114; iii. 427;
    <i>General Advertiser</i>, i. 227;
    <i>Gentl. Mag</i>. about Savage, i. 164;
    Goldsmith, ii. 235, n. 2;
    Green, the Lichfield apothecary, iv. 393;
    Grenville, George, i. 376, n. 2;
    about Gwynn the architect, v. 454, n. 2;
    Hamilton, W. G., iv. 245, 363;
    Hawkins, Sir John, iv. 435;
    Hastings, Warren, iv. 66, 68-70;
    Hector, Edmund, i. 64, n. 1; 87, n. 1, 189, n. 2, 340, n. 1,
370, n. 5; ii. 460, n. 3; iv. 145, n. 2, 146-7, 378;
    Heely, ——, iv. 371;
    Hickman, ——, i. 78, n. 2;
    Hoole, John, ii. 289; iv. 359-60;
    Humphry, Ozias, iv. 268-9;
    Hussey, Rev. John, iii. 369;
    Jenkinson, Charles (first Earl of Liverpool), iii. 145;
    Johnson, Mrs., his mother, i. 512, 513,514;
    Kearsley, ——, i. 214, n. 1;
    Lady, a, asking for a recommendation, i. 368;
    Langton, Bennet, i. 288, 324, 337, 338, 357; ii. 16, 17, 45, 135, 142,
146, 280, 361, 379; iii. 124, 365; iv. 132, 145, 240, 276-8, 352, 361;
    Langton, Miss Jane, iv. 271;
    Lawrence, Dr., ii. 296; iii. 419; iv. 137;
      Latin letter, iv. 143;
    Lawrence, Miss, iv. 144, n. 3;
    Leland, Dr., i. 489, 518; ii. 2, n. 1;
    Levett, ——, of Lichfield, i. 160;
    Levett, Robert, ii. 282, 385; iii. 92;
    Macleod, Laird of, v. 266, n. 2;
    Macpherson, James, ii. 298;
    Malone, E., iv. 141;
    Montague, Mrs., i. 232, n. 1; iii. 223, n. 1; iv. 239, n. 4;
    Mudge, Dr., iv. 240;
    Nichols, John, iv. 36, n. 4, 58, 160, 161, 163, n. 1, 369;
    Nicol, George, iv. 365;
    O'Connor, Charles, i. 321; iii. 111;
    Paradise, John, iv. 364;
    Parr, Dr., iv. 15, n. 5;
    Perkins, ——, ii. 286; iv. 118, 153, 257, 363;
    Porter, Miss, i. 212, n. 1, 346, n. 1, 513-6; ii. 387-8; iii.
393; iv. 89, 142-3, 145, n. 2, 203, 232, 256, 261, 394;
    Portmore, Lord, iv. 268, n. 1;
    Rasay, Laird of, v. 412;
    Reynolds, Sir Joshua, i. 486; ii. 141, 144; iii. 81, 82, 90; iv.
133, 161, 201, 219, 227, 253, 283, 348-9; 366-8;
    Richardson, Samuel, i. 303, n. 1; ii. 175, n. 1;
    Ryland, ——, iv. 352, n. 3, 357, n. 3, 369, n. 3;
    Sastres, iv. 368, n. 1, 374, n. 5;
    Sharp, V., iii. 126, n. 1;
    Simpson, Joseph, i. 346;
    Smart, Mrs., iii. 454; iv. 358, n. 2;
    Staunton, Dr., i. 367;
    Steevens, George, ii. 273; iii. 100;
    Strahan, W., iii. 364;
    Strahan, Mrs., iv. 100, 140;
    Taylor, Dr., i. 80, n. 1, 83, n. 2, 103, n. 3. 153. n. 4, 238,
472, n. 4; ii. 74, n. 3, 202, n. 2, 256, n. 1, 264, n. 1, 324, n. 1,
336, n. 1, 387, n. 2, 468, n. 2; iii. 120, n. 2, 136, n. 2, 180,
n. 3, 326, n. 5, 397, n. 2; iv. 139. n. 4, 151, n. 1, 155, n. 4,
162, n. 2, 165, n. 1, 191, n. 4, 213, n. 1, 228, 249, n. 2, 260, n. 2,
270, 409, n. 1, 443; v. 52, n. 6, 217, n. 1, 226, n. 2, 405, n. 1;
    Thrale, Mrs., iii. 134, n. 1, 423, 428; iv. 229, 242, 245;
      See THRALE, Mrs.;
    Thrale, Miss, iv. 245;
    Thurlow, Lord Chancellor, iv. 349; v. 364, n. 1;
    Vice-Chancellors of Oxford, i. 282; ii. 333;
    Vyse, Rev. Dr., iii. 125;
    Warton, Dr. Joseph, i. 253, 276, n. 2, 496, n. 2; ii. 115;
    Warton, Rev. Thomas, i. 270, 275-280, 282-284, 289-291, 322, 335, 336;
ii. 67, 114;
    Welch, Saunders, iii. 217;
    Wesley, John, iii. 394; v. 35, n. 3;
    Westcote, Lord, iv. 57, n. 1;
    Wetherell, Rev. Dr., ii. 424;
    Wheeler, Dr., iii. 366;
    White, Rev. Mr., ii. 207;
    Wilkes, John, iv. 224, n. 2;
    Wilson, Rev. Mr., iv. 162;
    Windham, Right Hon. William, iv. 227, 362;
  letters to Johnson
    from Argyle, Duke of, v. 363;
    Bellamy, Mrs., iv. 244, n. 2;
    Birch, Dr., i. 285;
    Boswell, Mrs., iv. 157;
    Croft, Rev., H., iv. 59, n. 1;
    Dodd, Dr., iii. 147;
    Elibank, Lord, v. 182;
    Thrale, Mrs., iii. 421;
    Thurlow, Lord, iii. 441;
  levee, i. 247, 307, n. 2; ii. 5, n. 1, 118;
    in Edinburgh, v. 395;
  liberality, i. 488; iii. 222;
  liberty,
    love of, i. 310, 311, 321, n. 1, 424; ii. 60, n. 3, 61, 118, 170;
    contempt of popular liberty, ii. 60, 170;
    of liberty of election, ii. 167, 340;
  library,
    described by Hawkins, i. 188, n. 3;
      by Boswell, i. 435;
    Johnson puts his books in order, iii. 7, 67;
      sale by auction, iv. 402, n. 2;
  Lichfield play-house, in the, ii. 299;
  <i>lie</i>, use of the word, iv. 49;
  life, balance of misery in it, iv. 300-304;
    dark views of it, iv. 300, n. 2, 427;
    more to be endured than enjoyed, ii. 124;
    struggles hard for it, iv. 360;
    would give one of his legs for a year of it, iv. 409;
    operates on himself, iv. 418, n. 1;
  light and airy, growing, iii. 415, n. 2;
  literary career in 1745-6, almost suspended, i. 176;
  Literary Club: see CLUBS and JOHNSON, club;
  literary reputation, estimated by Goldsmith, ii. 233;
  <i>Lives of the Poets</i>, proof of his vigour, iii. 98, n. 1;
    effect on his mind, iv. n. 1: see <i>Lives of the Poets</i>;
  London life, knowledge of, iii. 450;
    'permanent London object,' v. 347: see LONDON;
  Lords, did not quote the authority of, iv. 183: see JOHNSON, great;
  lost five guineas by hiding them, iv. 21;
  love, in love with Olivia Lloyd, i. 92;
    Hector's sister, ii. 460;
    Mrs. Emmet, ii. 464;
  <i>love</i>, Garrick sends him his, v. 350;
  low life, cannot bear, v. 307;
  <i>Lusiad</i>, projected translation of the, iv. 251;
  machinery, knowledge of, ii. 459, n. 1;
  madness, dreaded, i. 66;
    melancholy, confounded it with, iii. 175;
    'mad, at least not sober,' i. 35, 65; v. 215;
    often near it, i. 276, n. 2; iii. 99;
  majestic, v. 135;
  mankind, describes the general hostility of, iii. 236, n. 4;
  mankind less just and more beneficent, iii. 236;
    less expected of them, iv. 239;
  manners, disgusted with coarse, v. 307;
    total inattention to established manners, v. 70;
    his roughness, ii. 13. 66, 376;
      in contradicting, iv. 280;
      only external, ii. 362; iii. 80-81;
      partly due to his truthfulness, iv. 221, n. 2;
      rough as winter and mild as summer, iv. 396, n. 3;
    had been an advantage, iv. 295;
    Mickle never had a rough word, iv. 250;
    Malone never heard a severe thing from him, iv. 341;
    Miss Burney's account, iv. 426, n. 2;
    Macleods of Dunvegan Castle delighted with him, v. 208, n. 1;
    softened, iv. 65, n. 1, 220, n. 3;
  marriage, i. 95;
  Master of Arts degree, i. 132, 275, 278, n. 2, 279-283;
  medicine, knowledge of: see JOHNSON, physic;
  melancholy, confounds it with madness, iii. 175;
    constitutional, v. 17;
    exaggerated by Boswell, ii. 262, n. 2;
    inherited 'a vile melancholy,' i. 35;
    'morbid melancholy,' i. 63, 343;
    proposes to write the history of it, ii. 45, n. 1;
    remedies against it, i. 446:
    see JOHNSON, health;
  memory, extraordinary, early instances, i. 39, 48;
    shown in remembering, Ariosto, v. 368, n. 1;
    Bet Flint's verses, iv. 103, n. 2;
    Greek hymns, iii. 318, n. 1;
    Hay's <i>Martial</i>, v. 368;
    letter to Chesterfield, i. 263, n. 2;
    Rowe's plays, iv. 36, n. 3;
    verses on the Duke of Leed's marriage, iv. 14;
      complains of its failure, iii. 191, n. 1;
  men as they are, took, iii. 282;
  men and women, his subjects of inquiry, v. 439, n. 2;
  mental faculties, tests his, iv. 21;
  metaphysics, fond of, i. 70;
    withheld from their study, v. 109, n. 3;
  method, want of, iii. 94;
  'Methodist in a dignified manner,' i. 458, n. 3;
  military matters, interest in, iii. 361;
  militia, drawn for the, iv. 319;
  mill, compared to a, v. 265;
  mimicry, hatred of gesticular, ii. 326, n. 3;
  mind, his
    means of quieting it, i. 317;
    ready for use, i. 204; ii. 365, n. 1; iv. 428, 445;
    strained by work, i. 268, n. 4; 372, n. 1;
  moderation in his character, absence of, iv. 72;
    in wine, difficult, ii. 435: see JOHNSON, abstinence;
  modesty, iii. 81;
  monument in St. Paul's, i. 226, n. 1; iv. 423;
    subscription for it, ib., n. 1 and 3;
    epitaph, iv. 424, 444-6;
  mother, his
    death, i. 331, n. 4, 339, 512-15; ii. 124;
    debt, takes upon himself her, i. 160;
    dreads to lose her, i. 212, n. 1;
    letters, burns her, iv. 405, n. 1;
    wishes to see her, i. 288;
  music,
    account of his feelings towards it, ii. 409, n. 1;
    affected by it, iii. 197; iv. 22;
    bagpipe, listens to the, v. 315;
    flageolet, bought a, iii. 242;
    had he learnt it would have done nothing else, iii. 242; v. 315;
    insensible to its power, iii. 197;
    talks slightingly of it, ii. 409;
    wishes to learn the scale, ii. 263, n. 4;
    would be glad to have a new sense given him, ii. 409;
  musing, habit of, v. 73, n. 1;
  name, his, fraudulently used, v. 295;
  nature, affected by, iii. 455;
    description of a Highland valley, v. 141, n. 2;
    of various country scenes, v. 439, n. 2;
  neglect, dread of, iv. 137, n. 2;
    would not brook it, ii. 118;
  neglected at Brighton in 1782, iv. 159, n. 3;
  negligence in correcting errors, iii. 359, n. 2; iv. 51, n. 2;
  newspapers, accustomed to think little of them, iv. 150;
    constantly mentioned in them, iv. l27;
    'maintained' them, ii. 17;
    reads the <i>London Chronicle</i>, ii. 103;
  nice observer of behaviour, iii. 54;
  night-cap, did not wear a, v. 268, 306;
  nights, restless, ii. 143, 202, n. 2, 215, n. 2;  iii. 92, 99, n. 4,
109, n. 1, 218, 363, 369;
    when sleepless translated Greek into Latin verse, iv. 384;
  <i>nil admirari</i>, much of the, v. 111;
  notions, his, enlarged, v. 442;
  <i>Novum Museum</i>, ii. 17, n. 3;
  'O brave we!' v. 360;
  oak-sticks for Foote and Macpherson, ii. 299, 300, n. 1;
    for his Scotch tour, v. 19, 82;
    lost, v. 318;
  oath, his pardon asked by Murphy for repeating an, iii. 41;
  obligation, drawn into a state of, iii. 345, n. 1;
    impatient of them, i. 246, n. 1;
  obstinacy in supporting opinions, i. 293, n. 2;
  'Oddity,' iii. 209;
  offend, attentive not to, iii. 54, n. 1;
  'oil of vitriol,' his, v. 15, n. 1;
  old, never liked to think of being, iii. 302, 307;
  old man in his talk, nothing of the, iii. 336;
  oracle, a kind of public, ii. 118;
  orange-peel, use of, ii. 330;
  oratorio, at an, ii. 324, 72. 3;
  original writer, ii. 35;
  Oxford undergraduate, an, i. 58;
  pain, courage in bearing, iv. 240;
    easily supports it, i. 157, n. 1, 215;
    never totally free from it, i. 64, n. 1;
    operates on himself, iv. 399;
  painting,
    account of his feelings towards it, i. 363, n. 3;
    allegorical, historical, and portrait painting, compares, i. 363, 72;
v. 219, n. 3;
    Barry's pictures, praises, iv. 224;
    Exhibition, despises the, i. 363;
    laughs at talk about it, ii. 400, n. 3;
    prints, a buyer of, i. 363, n. 3; iv. 202, n. 1, 265;
    sale of his, i. 363, n. 3;
    Thrale's copper, asks Reynolds to paint, i. 363, n. 3;
    <i>Treatise on Painting</i>, reads a, i. 128, n. 2;
  palsy, struck with, iv. 168, n. 2, 227-33;
  pamphlets written against him, iv. 127;
  papers, burns his, i. 108; iii. 30, n. 1  iv. 405, 406, n. 1;
  papers, not to be burnt, ii. 420;
  Papist, if he could would be a, iv. 289;
  pardon, once begs, iv. 49, n. 3;
  Parliament, attacked and defended in it, iv. 318, n. 3;
    eulogised in it by Burke, iv. 407, n. 3;
    attempts made to bring him into it, ii. 137-139;
    projects an historical account of it, i. 155;
  parodies on Percy, ii. 136, n. 4, 212, n. 4;
    Warton, iii. 158, n. 3;
  party-opposition, averse to, ii. 348, n. 2;
  passions, his, iv. 396, n. 3;
  Passion-week, Johnson has an awe on him, ii-476;
    dines out every day, iii. 300, n. 1;
    dines with two Bishops, iv. 88;
    paper on it in <i>The Rambler</i>, i. 214; iv. 88;
  pastoral life, desires to study, iii. 455;
  pathos, want of, iv. 45;
  patience, iii. 26; v. 146-7;
  payment for his writings: see JOHNSON, works;
  peats, brings in a supply of, v. 303;
  peculiarities
    absence of mind, ii. 268, n. 2; iv. 71;
    avoiding an alley, i. 485;
    beating with his feet, v. 60, n. 3;
    blowing out his breath, i. 485; iii. 153;
    convulsive starts, i. 95;
      mentioned by Pope, i. 143;
      described, ib., i. 144, n. 1;
      astonish Hogarth, i. 146;
      alluded to by Churchill, i. 419, n. 1;
      astonish a young girl, iv. 183, n. 2;
      lose him an assistant-mastership, iv. 407, n. 4;
    described by Boswell, v. 18;
      by Reynolds, ib., n. 4;
    entering a room, i. 484;
    gesticulation, mimicked by Garrick, ii. 326;
    half-whistling, iii. 357;
    inarticulate sounds, i. 485; iii. 68;
    march, iv. 71, 425;
    pronunciation: see under JOHNSON, pronunciation;
    puffing hard with passion, iii. 273;
    riding, iv. 425;
    rolling, iii. 294, 357; iv. 109; v. 40;
    shaking his head and body, i. 485;
    striding across a floor, i. 145;
    talking to himself, i. 483; iv. 236, 399, n. 6; v. 306-7;
    touching posts, i. 485, n. 1;
    Boswell tells him of some of them, iv. 183, n. 2;
      he reads Boswell's account, v. 307, n. 2;
  Pembroke College: see under OXFORD, Pembroke College;
  penance in Uttoxeter market, iv. 373;
  penitents, a great lover of, iv. 406, n. 1;
  pension: see PENSION;
  personal appearance,
    described by Boswell, iv. 425; v. 18;
      by Miss Burney, i. 144, n. 1; ii. 141, n. 2; v. 23, n. 4;
      by Mrs. Piozzi and Reynolds, i. 94, n. 4;
      in <i>The Race</i> ii. 31;
      'A labouring working mind, an indolent reposing body,' iv. 444;
    fingers and nails, iv. 190;
    'ghastly smiles,' ii. 69, n. 1; v. 48, n. 1;
    'majestic frame,' i. 472;
    robust frame, i. 462;
    youth, in his, i. 94;
  philology, love of, iv. 34;
  philosophy, study of, i. 302;
  physicians, pleasure in the company  of, iv. 293;
  physick, knowledge of, i. 159; iii. 22;
    'great dabbler in it,' iii. 152;
  physics himself violently, iv. 135, n. 1; 229, n. 1;
    writes a prescription, v. 74;
  picture of himself in  [Greek: Gnothi seauton] i. 298, n. 4;
  piety, maintained  the obligations of, v. 17;
  plagiarism, i. 334;
  players, prejudice against: see PLAYERS;
  please, seeking to, iii. 54, n. 1;
  poems of his youth, i. 50;
  poetical mind, iii. 151; iv. 428; v. 17;
  poetry, pleasure in writing, iv. 219; v. 418;
  Politian, proposal to publish the poems of, i. 90;
  politeness, his, acknowledged, i. 286; ii. 36; iii. 81, 331; iv. 126;
v. 23, 82, 98-9, 363;
    thinks himself very polite, iii. 337; v. 363;
  political economy, ignorance of, ii. 430, n. 1;
  political principles, his, described by Dr. Maxwell, ii. 117-8;
  politician, intention of becoming a, i. 489; 518-520;
  'Pomposo,' i. 406;
  poor, loved the, ii. 119, n. 4;
  Pope's <i>Messiah</i> turned into Latin, i. 61;
  porter's knot, advised to buy a, i. 102, n. 2;
  portraits, list of his, iv. 421, n. 2;
    Burney, Miss, finds him examining one, ii. 141, n. 2;
    Reynolds, portraits by,—one with Beauclerk's inscription, iv.
      180, 444;
    'blinking Sam,' iii. 273, n. 1;
    Doughty's mezzotinto, ii. 286, n. 1;
    one engraved for Boswell's <i>Life</i>, presented by Reynolds to
      Boswell, i. 392; v. 385, n. 1;
    one admired at Lichfield, ii. 141;
    one at Streatham, iv. 158, n. 1;
    other portraits, iv. 421, n. 2;
    Reynolds, Miss, by, ii. 362, n. 1; iv. 229. n. 4;
  post-chaise, delight in a: See POST-CHAISE;
  praise and abuse, wishes he had kept a book of, v. 273;
  praise, loved, but did not seek it, iv. 427; v. 17;
    disliked extravagant praise, iii. 225; iv. 82;
  prayers: See PRAYERS, and <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>;
  prefaces, skill in, i. 139;
  preference to himself, refused, iii. 54, n. 1;
  Presbyterian service, would not attend a, iii. 336; v. 121, 384;
    attends family prayer, v. 121;
  pride, described by Reynolds, iii. 345, n. 1;
    defensive, i. 265;
    no meanness in it, iv. 429, n. 3;
  princes, attacks, i. l49, n. 3;
  principles and practice: See PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE;
  prize-fighting, regrets extinction of, v. 229;
  profession, regrets that he had not a, iii. 309, n. 1;
  professor in the imaginary college, v. 109;
  promptitude of mind: See JOHNSON, mind;
  pronunciation—excellent, v. 85;
    provincial accent, ii. 159, 464;
  property, iv. 284, 402, n. 2;
  public affairs, refuses to talk of, iv. 173;
  public singer, on preparing himself for a, ii. 369;
  public speaking, ii. 139;
  punctuality, not used to, i. 211;
  Punic war, would not hear of the, iii. 206, n. 1;
  punish, quick to, ii. 363;
  puns, despises, ii. 241; iv. 316;
  puns himself, iii. 325; iv. 73, 81;
  questioning, disliked, ii. 472, n. 1; iii. 57, 268; iv. 439
    (See, however, iii. 24, n. 2);
  quiet hours, seen in his, iii. 81, n. 1;
  quoting his writings against him, iv. 274;
  races with Baretti, ii. 386;
  Ranelagh, feelings on entering, iii. 199;
  rank, respect for: See Birth; rationality, obstinate, iv. 289;
  read to, impatient to be, iv. 20;
  reading,
    amount of his, i. 70; ii. 36;
      before college, i. 56, 445;
      at college, i. 70; ii. 36;
      read rapidly, i. 71; iv. 334, n. 3;
      ravenously, iii. 284;
      like a Turk, iv. 409;
      did not read books through, i. 71; ii. 226;
      reads more than he did, ii. 35, n. 3; iv. 218, n. 2;
    slight books, v. 313;
    when travelling, <i>Pomponius Mela de situ Orbis</i>, i. 465;
      <i>Il Palmerino d'Inghilterra</i>, iii. 2;
      <i>Euripides</i>, iv. 311;
      Tully's <i>Epistles</i>, v. 428;
      <i>Martial</i>, v. 429;
  recitation, described by Boswell, ii. 212; iii. 29; v. 115;
    Murphy, ii. 92, n. 4; v. 115, n. 5;
    Mrs. Piozzi, ii. 212, n. 3; v. 115, n. 5;
    Reynolds, v. 115; a great reciter, v. 43;
  'recommending' the dead: See under DEAD;
  reconciliation,
    ready to seek a, ii. 100, n. 1; 109, 256; ib., n. 1; iii. 271;
  rectory, offer of a, i. 320, 476; ii. 120;
  refinement, high estimation of, iii. 54;
  relations on the father's side, i. 35, n. 1; iv. 401;
  religion, 'conversion,' his, iv. 272, n. 1;
    early indifference to it, i. 67;
    totally regardless of it, iv. 215;
    early training, i. 38, 67;
    'ignorant of it,' ii. 476;
    a lax talker against it, i. 68;
    predominant object of his thoughts, i. 69; ii. 124;
    brought back by sickness, iv. 215;
    'never denied Christ,' iv. 414, n. 2;
  remorse, i. 164; 398, n. 5;
  repetitions in his writings, i. 334, n. 2;
  reproved by a lady, v. 39;
  reputation, did not trouble himself to defend his, ii. 433;
  residences: See Habitations;
  resistance to bad government lawful, ii. 61, 170;
  respect due to him, maintained the, iii. 310;
    shows respect to a Doctor in Divinity, ii. l24;
  'respectable Hottentot' not Johnson, i. 267, n. 2;
  respected by others: by Boswell and Mrs. Thrale loved, ii. 427;
  resolutions, 'fifty-five years spent in resolving,' i. 483;
    rarely efficacious, ii. 113;
    neglected, iv. 134; reveries, i. 144, n. 1, 145;
  Reynolds's pictures, 'never looked at,' ii. 317, n. 2;
  riding, v. 131, 285, 302: See JOHNSON, foxhunting;
  ringleader of a riot, said to have been the, iv. 324;
  rising late, i. 495, n. 3; ii. 17, 143, 410, 477; v. 210;
  'roarings of the old lion,' ii. 284, n. 2;
  roaring people down, iii. 150, 290;
  roasts apples, iv. 218, n. 1;
  robbed, never, ii. 119;
  romances, love of, i. 49; iii. 2;
  roughness: See JOHNSON, manners;
  Round-Robin, receives the, iii. 83-5;
  Royal Academy, Professor of the, ii. 67; iv. 423, n. 2;
  rumour that he was dying, iii. 221;
  rural beauties, little taste for, i. 461; v. 112;
  sacrament, not received with tranquillity, ii. 115, n. 2;
    instances of his receiving it at other times but Easter, ii. 43, n. 3;
iv. 270, 416;
  same one day as another, not the, iii. 192;
  sarcastic in the defence of good principles, ii. 13;
  <i>Sassenach More</i>, ii. 267, n. 2;
  satire, explosions of, iii. 80;
    ignorant of the effect produced, iv. 168, n. 2;
  Savage, effects of intimacy with, i. 161-4; v. 365;
  saying, tendency to paltry, iv. 191;
  sayings not accurately reported, ii. 333;
  scenery, descriptions of moonlight sail, v. 333, n. 1;
    of a ride in a storm, v. 346, n. 1;
  schemes of a better life, i. 483; iv. 230;
  scholar, preferred the society of intelligent men of the world to
that of a, iii. 21, n. 3;
  'school,' his, described by Courtenay, i. 222;
    by Reynolds, i. 245, n. 3; iii. 230;
    distinguished for truthfulness, i. 7, n. 1; iii. 230;
    Goldsmith, one of its brightest ornaments, i. 417;
    taught men to think rightly, i. 245, n. 3;
  schoolmaster, life as a, i. 97, n. 2, 98, n. 2, 488, n. 3;
  Scotch, feelings towards the: See under SCOTLAND;
  Scotland, tour in, ii. 266-8; v. 1-416;
  <i>scottified</i>, v. 55;
  screen, dines behind a, i. 163, n. 1;
  scruple, troubled with Baxter's, ii. 477;
    not weakly scrupulous, iv. 397:
    See SCRUPLES;
  seal, cut with his head, iv. 421, n. 2;
  seasons, effect of: See WEATHER;
  second sight: See under SCOTLAND, HIGHLANDS, second sight;
  'seducing man, a very,' iv. 57, n. 3;
  <i>Seraglio</i>, his, iii. 368;
    an imaginary one, v. 216;
  sermons composed by him, i. 241; iii. 19, n. 3, 181; iv. 381, n. 1;
v. 67;
  severe things, how mainly extorted from him, iv. 341;
  Shakespeare, read in his childhood, i. 70;
    See under SHAKESPEARE;
  shoes worn out, i. 76;
  sight,
    account of it by Boswell, iv. 425; v. 18;
      by Miss Burney, iv. 160, n. 1, 304, n. 4;
    actors' faces, could not see, ii. 92, n. 4;
    acuteness shown in criticising dress, v. 428, n. 1;
      in his French diary, ii. 401;
      in observing scenes, i. 41; iii. 187; iv. 311; v. 141;
    Baretti's trial, at, ii. 97, n. 1;
    <i>Blinking Sam,</i> iii. 273, n. 1;
    difficulty in crossing the kennel when a child, i. 39;
    eyes wild and piercing, i. 94, n. 4, 464, n. 1;
      only one eye, i. 41;
      restored to its use, i. 305;
      inflamed, ii. 263-4;
  short-sighted, called by Dr. Percy, iii. 273;
  silence, fits of, ii. 213; iii. 307; v. 73;
  silver buckles, iii. 325;
    cup, i. 163, n. 2;
    plate, ii. 5, n. i; iv. 92;
  singularity, dislike of, ii. 74, n. 3; iv. 325;
  sins, never balanced against virtues, iv. 398;
  slavery, hatred of: See SLAVES;
  sleep: See Nights;
  smallpox, has the, v. 435;
  Smith, Adam, compared with, iv. 24, n. 2;
  <i>Sober,</i> Mr., of <i>The Idler,</i> iii. 398, n. 3;
  social, truly, iv. 284;
  society, mixing with polite, i. 80, 82, 496, n. 1; ii. 467;
iii. 272, n. 3 424; iv. 1, n. 1, 89, 108, n. 4, 109, 116-17, 147, 326,
357; v. 43, 98, 207, 358. 371, 374, 394, 455,457;
  solitude, hatred of, i. 144, n. 2, 297, 339, n. 3, 515; iii; 405;
iv. 427;
    suffers from it, iv. 163, n. 1:
    See under JOHNSON, household;
  'soothed,' ii. 113;
  sophistry, love of, ii. 61; recourse to it, iv. iii;
  sought after nobody, iii. 314;
  Southwark election, ii. 287, n. 2;
  speaking, impressive mode of, ii. 326;
  spelling incorrect, i. 260, n. 2; iv. 36, n. 4; v. 124, n. 1;
  spirit, lofty, iv. 374;
  spirit, wishes for evidence for, ii. 150; iii. 298, n. 1; iv. 298:
    See JOHNSON, super-natural;
  splendour on, £600 a year, iv. 337;
  spurs, loses his, iv. 407, n. 4; v. 163;
  St. Clement Danes, his seat in, ii. 214;
  St. James's Square, walks with Savage round, i. 163, n. 2, 164;
  St. John's Gate, reverences, i. III;
  St. Vitus's dance, v. 18;
  stately shop, deals at a, iv. 319;
  straggler, a, iii; 306;
  Streatham, 'absorbed from his old friends,' i. 495, n. 2; ii. 427, n. 1;
iii. 225;
    Miss Burney describes his life there, iv. 340, n. 3;
    his 'home,' i. 493, n. 3; ii. 77, 141, n. 1; iii. 451; iv. 340;
    his late hours there, ii. 407;
    his farewell to it, iv. 158;
  studied behaviour, disapproves of, i. 470;
  study, advice about, i. 428; iv. 311;
  style,
    account of it, i. 217-25;
    Addison's, compared with, i. 224, 225, n. 1;
    affected by his <i>Dictionary,</i> i. 221, n. 4;
    'Brownism,' i. 221, 308;
    caricatures of it, by Blair, iii. 172;
      Colman, iv. 387, 388, n. 1;
      <i>Lexiphanes,</i> ii. 44;
      Maclaurin, ii. 363;
      in a magazine, v. 273;
      man <i>Ode to Mrs. Thrale,</i> iv. 387;
    changes in it, iii. 172, n. 2;
    criticises it himself, iii. 257, n. 3;
      easier in his poems than his prose, v. 17;
      female writing, ill-suited for, i. 223;
      formed on Temple and Chambers, i. 218;
      on writers of the seventeenth century, i. 219;
    Gallicisms, dislikes, iii. 343, n. 3;
    imitations of it, by Barbauld, Mrs., iii. 172;
      Burney, Miss, iv. 389;
      Burrowes, Rev. R., iv. 386;
      Gibbon, iv. 389;
      Knox, Rev. Dr., iv. 390;
      Mackenzie, Henry, iv. 390, n. 1;
      Nares, Rev. Mr., iv. 389;
      newspapers, iv. 381, n. 1;
      Robertson, iii. 173; iv. 388;
      Young, Professor, iv. 392;
    <i>Lives of the Poets,</i> iii. 172, n. 2;
    <i>Lobo's Abyssinia,</i> translation of, i. 87;
    Monboddo, criticised by, iii. 173;
    parentheses, dislikes, iv. 190;
    <i>Plan of the Dictionary,</i> i. 184;
    Rambler, i. 217; iii. 172, n. 2;
    talk, like his, iv. 237, n. 1;
    'the former, the latter,' dislikes, iv. 190;
    Thrale, Mrs., described by, iii. 19, n. 2;
    translates a saying into his own style, iv. 320;
    Warburton attacks it, iv. 48;
  subordination: see SUBORDINATION;
  Sunday: see SUNDAY;
  superiority over his fellows, i. 47;
  supernatural  agency, willingness to examine it, i. 406; v. 18;
  superstition, prone to, iv. 426; v. 17:
    see GHOSTS, and JOHNSON, spirit;
  'surly virtue,' iii. 69;
  swearing, profane, dislikes, ii. 338, n. 2; iii. 189;
    falsely represented as swearing, ii. 338, n. 2;
    'swore enough,' iv. 216;
    uses a profane expression, v. 306;
  swimming, i. 348; ii. 299; iii. 92, n. 1;
    Latin verses on it, ib.;
  talk—,
    alike to all, talked, ii. 323;
    best, rule to talk his, iv. 183, 185, n. 1;
    books, did not talk from, v. 378;
    calmly in private, iii. 331;
    'his little fishes would talk like whales,' ii. 231;
    loved to have his talk out, iii. 230;
    not restrained by a stranger, ii. 438; iv. 284;
    ostentatiously, talks, v. l24;
    'talked their best,' his phrase, iii. 193, n. 3;
    victory, talks for, ii. 238; iv. 111; v. 17, 324;
    writing, like his, iv. 237, n. 1:
    see JOHNSON, conversation;
  talking to himself: see JOHNSON, peculiarities;
  <i>tanti</i> men, dislike of, iv. 112;
  taste in theatrical merits, ii. 465;
  tea,
    Careless, Mrs., told him when he had enough, ii. 460, n. 1;
    cups, a dozen, i. 313, n. 3;
      fifteen, ii. 268, n. 2;
      sixteen, v. 207, n. 1;
    <i>claudile jam rivos pueri</i>, v. 279;
    effects of it on him, i. 313;
    misses drinking it once, v. 443;
    'shameless tea-drinker,' i. 103, n. 3;
    drank it at all hours, i. 313; v. 23;
    takes it always with Miss Williams, i. 42l;
      teachers, his, Dame Oliver, i. 43;
      Tom Brown, ib.;
      Hawkins, ib.;
      Hunter, i. 44;
      Wentworth, i. 49;
  teaching men, pleasure in, ii. 101;
  temper, easily offended, iii. 345; iv. 426; v. 17;
    violent, iii. 81, 290, 300, 337, 384; iv. 65, n. 1;
    'terrible severe humour,' iv. 159, n. 3;
    violent passion, iv. 171;
      on Rattakin, v. 145-7;
  tenderness of heart, shown about Dr. Brocklesby's offer, iv. 338;
    friendship with Hoole, iv. 360;
    his friends' efforts for an increase in his pension, iv. 337;
    pious books, iv. 88, n. 1;
    on hearing Dr. Hodges's story, ii. 341, n. 3;
    kissing Streatham  church, iv. 159;
    and the old willow-tree at Lichfield, iv. 372, n. 1;
    in reciting Beattie's <i>Hermit</i>, iv. 186;
      <i>Dies Irae</i>, iii. 358, n. 3;
      Goldsmith's <i>Traveller</i>, v. 344;
      lines on Levett, iv. 165, n. 4;
      <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>, iv. 45, n. 3;
  terror, an object of, i. 450, n. 1;
  theatres, left off going to the, ii. 14;
  thinking, excelled in the art of, iv. 428;
    thought more than he read, ii. 36;
    thoughts, loses command over his, ii. 190; 202, n. 2;
  Thrales,
    his 'coalition' with the, i. 493, n. 3;
    his intimacy not without restraint, iii. 7;
    gross supposition about it, iii. 7;
    supposed wish to marry Mrs. Thrale, iv. 387, n. 1:
    see THRALES, and under JOHNSON, Streatham;
  toleration, views on, ii. 249-254;
  Tory, a, 'not in the party sense,' ii. 117;
  his Toryism abates, v. 386;
    might have written a <i>Tory History of England</i>, iv. 39;
  'tossed and gored,' ii. 66;
  tossed Boswell, iii. 338;
  town, the, his element, iv. 358: see. LONDON;
  'tragedy-writer, a,' i. 102;
    reason of his failure, i. 198, 199, n. 2;
  translates for booksellers, i. 133;
  travelling, love of, Appendix B., iii. 449-459;
  'tremendous companion,' i. 496, n. 1;
  'true-born Englishman,' i. 129; ii. 300; iv. 15, n. 3, 191;
v. 1, n. 1, 20;
  truthfulness, exact precision in conversation, ii. 434; iii. 228;
    Rousseau, compared with, ii. 434, n. 2;
    truth held sacred by him, ii. 433, n. 2; iv. 305, n. 3;
    all of his 'school' distinguished for it, i. 7, n. 1; iii. 230;
    scrupulously inquisitive to discover it, ii. 247;
    talked as if on oath, ii. 434, n. 2;
  tutor to Mr. Whitby, i. 84, n. 2;
  '<i>un politique aux choux et aux raves</i>,' iii. 324;
  uncle, account of an, v. 316;
  unobservant, iii. 423, n. 1;
  unsocial shyness, free from, iv. 255;
  <i>Ursa Major</i>, v. 384;
  utterance, slow deliberate, ii. 326; iv. 429; v. 18;
  verse-making, ii. 15;
    made verses and forgot them, ib.;
    youthful verses, i. 92;
  Vesey's, Mr., surrounded by great people at, iii. 425;
  Virgil,
    quoted '<i>Optima quceque dies</i>,' ii. 129;
    reads him, ii. 288; iv. 218;
  <i>Vision of Theodore</i>,
    thought by him the best thing he ever wrote, i. 192;
  vocation to public life, iv. 359;
    to active life, v. 63;
  Wales, tour to: see WALES;
  walk, his, in a court in the Temple, i. 463;
  wants, fewness of his, ii. 474, n. 3;
  warrants said to be issued against him, i. 141;
  watch, dial-plate of his, ii. 57;
  watched, his door, v. 248;
  water, lectures on, v. 64;
  water-fall, at Dr. Taylor's, iii. 190-1;
  weather, influence of: see WEATHER;
  Westminster Police Court, attendance at the, iii. 216;
  whisky, tastes, v. 346;
  'Why, no Sir!' iv. 316, n. 1;
  wife,
    affection for his, i. 96, 234-241; ii. 77;
    disagreements, i. 239;
      reported estrangement, i. 163, n. 2;
    death, her, i. 234, 238, 277;
      alluded to in his letter to Chesterfield, i. 262;
      anniversary of the day, i. 236; iii. 98, n. 1; 317, n. 1;
    funeral sermon, i. 241; iii. 181, n. 3;
    grave and epitaph, i. 241; iv. 351, 369, n. 3, 394;
      'resolves on Tetty's coffin,' i. 354, n. 2;
    grief, his, i. 235-241;
    almost broke his heart, iii. 305, 419;
    'recommended,' i. 190, n. 2, 240, n. 5; ii. 476-7;
    saucer, her, iii. 220, n. 1;
    wishes for her in Paris, ii. 393;
      at Brighton, ib., n. 8;
  wig, his,
    a bushy one, i. 113, n. 1;
    Paris-made, ii. 403, n. 5; iii. 325;
    fore-top burnt, ib., n. 3;
  Wilkes, compared with, iii. 64, 78;
  will, averse to execute his, iv. 402;
    makes it, ib., n. 2;
  wine, use of, i. 103, n. 3;
  wisdom, his trade was, iii. 137, n. 1;
  wit, extraordinary readiness, iii. 80;
    Garrick's account of it, ii. 231;
  woman, rescues an outcast, iv. 321;
    talks with others of the class, i. 223, n. 2; iv. 396;
  wonders, distrust of, iii. 229, n. 3;
  words,
    charged with using hard and big words, i. 184, 218, n. 2; iii. 190;
    <i>sesquipedalia verba</i>, v. 399;
    in the <i>Rambler</i>, i. 208, n. 3;
    in <i>Lives of the Poets</i>, iv. 39;
    needs words of larger meaning, i. 218; iii. 173;
    'terms of philosophy familiarised,' i. 218;
    words added to the language, i. 221; iv-39, n. 3; v. 130;
  work, did his, in a workmanlike manner, iii. 62;
  Works, those ascertained marked *, conjectured +, i. 112, n. 4;
    Booksellers' edition, edited by Hawkins and Stockdale, i. 190, n. 4;
iii. 141 5 iv. 324;
    right reserved by him to print an edition, i. 193; iv. 409;
    catalogue of his Works, i. 16-24;
      asked for by his friends, i. 112; iii. 321;
      Historia Studiorum_, ib.;
      one made by Boswell, iii. 322; iv. 383, n. 1;
      projected works, ib.;
    payments received,
      <i>Translation of Lobo's Abyssinia</i>, five guineas, i. 87;
      <i>London</i>, ten guineas, i. 124;
      translation of part of <i>Sarpi's History</i>, £49, i. 135;
      <i>Historical Account of Parliament</i>, part payment, two guineas for
a sheet of copy, i. 156;
      <i>Life of Savage</i>, fifteen guineas, i. 165, n. 1;
      <i>Dictionary</i> £1575 (heavy out-payments to amanuenses), i. 183;
      <i>Rambler</i>, two guineas a number, i. 208, n. 3;
      <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>, fifteen guineas, i. 193, n. 1;
      <i>Irene</i>, theatre receipts, £195, copyright, £100, i. 198, n. 2;
      <i>Introduction to London Chronicle</i>, one guinea, i. 317;
      <i>Idler</i>, first collected edition, £84 2s. 4d., i. 335, n. 1;
      <i>Rasselas</i>, £100, + £25, i. 341;
      <i>Lives of the Poets</i>, 200 guineas (? pounds) agreed on, iii. 111;
iv. 35;
         £100 added, ib.;
         £100 more for a new edition, ib., n. 3;
  world, knowledge of the, iii. 20;
    'a man of the world,' i. 427;
    had been long 'running about it,' i. 215;
    never complained of it, iv. 116, 171;
    never sought it, iv. 172;
    respected its judgment, i. 200, n. 2;
  worshipped, iii. 331;
  writings, criticised his own, iv. 5;
    never wrote error, iv. 429; v. 17:
    see JOHNSON, composition;
  youth, pleasure in talking of the days of, iv. 375.
JOHNSON, Sarah (Johnson's mother),
  account of her, i. 34, 35, n. 1, 38;
  counted the days to the publication of the <i>Dictionary</i>, i. 288;
  debt, in, i. 160;
  death, i. 331, n. 4, 339, 512-5;
  epitaph, iv. 393;
  funeral expenses and <i>Rasselas</i>, i. 341;
  <i>Harlcian Miscellany</i>, subscribes to the, i. 175, n. 1;
  Johnson, teaches, i. 38;
    encourages him in his lessons, i. 43, n. 4;
    hears her call <i>Sam</i>, iv. 94;
    letters to her, i. 5I2, 5I3, 514;
    marriage, i. 95;
  London, visits, i. 42, 110;
  receipts for bills, i. 90, n. 3.
JOHNSON, Thomas (Johnson's cousin), iv. 402, n. 2, 440.
<i>Johnson in Birmingham</i>, i. 85, n. 3; 95, n. 3.
JOHNSON BUILDINGS, iii. 405, n. 6.
JOHNSON'S COURT,
  Johnson removes to it, ii. 5;
  Boswell and Beauclerk's veneration for it, ii. 229, 427;
  'Johnson of that <i>Ilk</i>,' ib., n. 2; iii. 405, n. 6.
<i>Johnsoniana, or Bon-Mots of Dr. Johnson</i>, ii. 432; iii. 325.
<i>Johnsoniana</i> (by Taylor), iv. 421, n. 2.
<i>Johnsonianissimus</i>, i. 7, n. 2.
<i>Johnsonised</i>, 'I have <i>Johnsonised</i> the land,' i. 13.
<i>Johnston</i>, the Scotch form of Johnson, iii. 106, n. 1.
JOHNSTON, Arthur,
  Johnson desires his portrait, iv. 265;
  <i>Poemata</i>, i. 460; i 104; v. 95.
JOHNSTON, Sir James, iv. 281.
JOHNSTON, W., the bookseller, i. 341.
JOHNSTONE, Governor, i. 304, n. 1.
JOKES, a game of, ii. 231.
JONES, Miss (The <i>Chantress</i>), i. 322.
JONES, Phil., ii. 444.
JONES, Rev. River, i. 323, n. 4.
JONES, Sir William,
  Garrick's funeral, iii. 371, n. 1;
  'Harmonious Jones,' i. 223;
  Johnson's admiration of Newton, anecdote of, ii. 125, n. 4;
    Journey, commends, iii. 137;
    use of <i>scrupulosity</i>; 'Jones teach me modesty and Greek,' iv. 433;
  languages, knowledge of, v. 108, n. 9;
  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479 ii. 240; v. 109, n. 5;
    account of the black-balling, iii. 311, n. 2;
  <i>Persian Grammar</i>, iv. 69, n. 2;
  portrait, ii. 25, n. 2;
  professor in the imaginary college, v. 108;
  Shipley, Miss, marries, iv. 75, n. 3;
  study of the law, iv. 309, n. 6;
  Thurlow's character, iv. 349, n. 3;
  mentioned, iii. 386.
JONSON, Ben,
  <i>Alchemist</i>, iii. 35, n. 1;
  <i>Fall of Mortimer</i>, iii. 78, n. 4;
  at Hawthornden, v. 402, 414;
  Kitely acted by Garrick, ii. 92, n. 3;
  <i>Leges Convivales</i>, iv. 254, n. 4.
JOPP, Provost, ii. 291; v. 90.
JORDEN, Rev. William (Johnson's tutor), i. 59, 61, 79, 272.
JORTIN, Rev. Dr. John,
  attacked by Hurd, iv. 47, n. 2;
  Johnson desires information about him, iv. 161;
  <i>Sermons</i>, iii. 248.
JOSEPH EMANUEL, King of Portugal, iv. 174, n. 5.
<i>Jour</i>, derivation of, ii. 156.
JOURNAL,
  how it should be kept, ii. 217;
    kept for a man's own use, iv. 177;
    record to be made at once, i. 337; iii. 218; v. 393;
    state of mind to be recorded, ii. 217; iii. 228; v. 272;
    trifles not to be recorded, ii. 358;
  Johnson advises Baretti to keep one, i. 365;
    and Boswell, i. 433, 475; ii. 358;
  mirror, like a, iii. 228;
  regularity inconsistent with spirit, i. 155:
  See JOHNSON, Journal, and BOSWELL, Journal.
<i>Journal des Savans</i>, ii. 39.
<i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>. See under BOSWELL.
<i>Journey to London</i>. See <i>The Provoked Husband</i>.
<i>Journey into North Wales</i>, ii. 285; v. 427-460;
  Mrs. Piozzi's account of its publication, v. 427, n. 1;
  suppressions and corrections, ib.;
  inscription on blank leaf, iv. 299, n. 3.
<i>Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland</i>,
    first thought of in a valley, v. 141, n. 2;
    composition of it, ii. 268-9, 271;
    in the press, ii. 278-9, 281, 284, 287-8; v. 443;
    published, ii. 290, 292;
    sale, ii. 310; iii. 325;
    second edition, ii. 291, n. 4; iii. 325, n. 5;
    note added to it, v. 412, n. 2;
    translation, ii. 310, n. 2;
      errors, ii. 291, 301, 303; v. 412;
  attacked by 'shallow North Britons,' ii. 305, 307;
    in McNicol's <i>Remarks</i>, ii. 308;
    supposed attack by Macpherson, ib., n. 1;
    in Scotch newspapers, ii. 363;
    misapprehended to rancour, v. 20;
  Boswell projects a Supplement, ii. 300, n. 2;
  Burke, Jones and Jackson commend it, iii. 137;
  Burney's <i>Travels</i> in Johnson's view as he wrote, iv. 186;
  composed from very meagre materials, v. 405;
  copy sent to the King, ii, 290;
    to Warren Hastings, iv. 69;
    to various other people, ii. 278, 285, 288, 290, 309, 310;
iii. 94, 102;
  criticised by Dempster, ii. 303; iii. 301; v. 405, 407-9;
    Dick, iii. 103;
    Hailes, v. 405-7;
    <i>Hermes</i> Harris, ii. 265;
    Knox, ii. 304;
    Tytler, ii. 305;
  Highlanders like it more than Lowlanders, ii. 308;
  Iona, description of, iii. 173; v. 334;
  Johnson anxious to know how it was received, ii. 290, 292, 294;
    goes where nobody goes, v. 157, n. 3;
    had much of it in his mind before starting, iii. 301.
    letters to Mrs. Thrale, ii. 303, 305; v. 145, n. 2;
    saw a different system of life, iv. 199; v. 112, 405;
    shows gratitude and delicacy, ii. 303;
  Macaulay, quoted by, iii. 449;
  new, contains much that is, iii. 326;
  Orme, described by, ii. 300; v. 408, n. 4;
  route, choice of a, v. 120;
  talked of in the Literary Club and London generally, ii. 318.
JOWETT, Rev. Professor Benjamin,
  Master of Balliol College, ii. 338, n. 2.
JUBILEE. See SHAKESPEARE.
JUDGE, an eminent noble, iv. 178.
JUDGES,
  afraid of the people, v. 57;
  engaging in trade, ii. 343;
  farming, ii. 344;
  in private life, v. 396;
  partial to the populace, ii. 353;
  places held for life, ii. 353.
JUDGMENT,
  compared with admiration, ii. 360;
  source of erroneous judgments, ii. 131.
<i>Julia or the Italian Lover</i>, i. 262, n. 1.
<i>Julia Mandeville</i>, ii. 402, n. 1.
JULIEN, the Treasurer of the Clergy, ii. 391.
JULIEN, of the Gobelins, v. 107.
JULIUS CAESAR, iii. 171.
JUNIUS, Francis, i. 186.
<i>Junius</i>,
  Burke, not, iii. 376;
  Burke, Hamilton and Wilkes most suspected, ib., n. 4;
  Samuel Dyer, iv. 11, n. 1;
  concealment of the author, iii. 376;
  duty of authors who are questioned about the authorship, iv. 305-6;
  impudence, his, ii. 164;
  Johnson attacks him, ii. 135;
  Norton, Sir Fletcher, attacks, ii. 472, n. 2.
JURIES,
  guards afraid of them, iii. 46;
  judges of law, iii. 16, n. 1.
JUSTICE, a picture of, iv. 321.
JUSTICE HALL, ii. 98.
JUSTICES OF THE PEACE. See MAGISTRATES.
JUSTITIA HULK, iii. 268.
JUVENAL,
  <i>Third Satire</i>, Johnson's imitation, i. 118 (see <i>London</i>);
    Boileau's, ib.;
    Oldham's, ib.;
  <i>Tenth Satire</i>, Johnson's imitation, i. 192
    (see <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>);
  intention to translate other <i>Satires</i>, i. 193;
  quotations,
    <i>Sat</i>. i. 29, iv. 179, n. 4;
    <i>Sat</i>. i. 79, v. 277, n. 4;
    <i>Sat</i>. iii. 1, i. 325, n. 1;
    <i>Sat</i>. iii. 2, ii. 133;
    <i>Sat</i>. iii. 149, i. 77, n. 1;
    <i>Sat</i>. iii. 164, i. 77, n. 3;
    <i>Sat</i>. iii. 230 (<i>unius lacertae</i>), iii. 255;
    <i>Sat</i>. viii. 73, iv. 114, n. 1;
    <i>Sat</i>. x. 8, iv. 354, n. 2;
    <i>Sat</i>. x. 180, ii. 227;
    <i>Sat</i>. x. 217, iv. 357, n. 2;
    <i>Sat</i>. x. 356, iv. 401, n. 1;
    <i>Sat</i>. x. 365, iv. 180, n. 1;
    <i>Sat</i>. xiv. 139, iii. 415, n. 3.</p>

<h3>K.</h3>

<p>KAMES, Lord (Henry Home),<br/>

  coarse language in Court, ii. 200, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Elements of Criticism</i>, i. 393; ii. 89-90;<br/>

  Eton boys, on, i. 224, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Hereditary Indefeasible Right</i>, v. 272;<br/>

  Johnson, attacks, ii. 317, n. 1;<br/>

    prejudiced against, i. 148;<br/>

  'keep him,' ii. 53;<br/>

  <i>Sketches of the History of Man</i><br/>

  Charles V celebrating his funeral obsequies, iii. 247;<br/>

  Clarendon's account of Villiers's ghost, iii. 351;<br/>

  interest of money, iii. 340;<br/>

  Irish export duties, ii. 131, n. 1;<br/>

  Lapouchin, Madame, iii. 340;<br/>

  Paris Foundling Hospital, mortality in the, ii. 398, n. 5;<br/>

  schools not needed for the poor, iii. 352, n. 1;<br/>

  virtue natural to man, iii. 352;<br/>

  Smollett's monument, v. 366;<br/>

  'vicious Intromission,' ii. 198, 200;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 126.<br/>

KAUFFMANN, Angelica, iv. 277, n. 1.<br/>

KEARNEY, Michael, i. 489.<br/>

KEARSLEY, the bookseller,<br/>

  letter from Johnson, i. 214;<br/>

  publishes a <i>Life of Johnson</i>, iv. 421, n. 2.<br/>

KEDDLESTONE, iii. 160-2; v. 431-2.<br/>

KEEN, Sir Benjamin, v. 310, n. 3.<br/>

KEENE, ——, ii. 397.<br/>

KEITH, Admiral Lord, v. 427, n. 1.<br/>

KEITH, Mrs., v. 130.<br/>

KEITH, Robert, <i>Catalogue of the Scottish Bishops</i>, i. 309.<br/>

KEITH, ——, a collector of excise, v. 128-31.<br/>

KELLY, sixth Earl of, v. 387.<br/>

KELLY, Hugh,<br/>

  account of him, iii. 113, n. 3;<br/>

  displays his spurs, iv. 407, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>False Delicacy</i>, ii. 48;<br/>

  Johnson's <i>Prologue</i>, iii. 113, 118.<br/>

KEMBLE, John,<br/>

  visits Johnson, iv. 242-4;<br/>

  anecdote of Johnson and Garrick, i. 216, n. 3;<br/>

  affected by Mrs. Siddons' acting, iv. 244, n. 1.<br/>

KEMPIS, Thomas à,<br/>

  editions and translations, iii. 226; iv. 279;<br/>

  Johnson quotes him, iii. 227, n. 1;<br/>

  reads him in Low Dutch, iv. 21.<br/>

KEN, Bishop,<br/>

  connected by marriage with Isaac Walton, ii. 364, n. 1;<br/>

  a nonjuror, iv. 286, n. 3;<br/>

  rule about sleep, iii. 169, n. 1.<br/>

KENNEDY, Rev. Dr., <i>Complete System of Astronomical Chronology</i>, i. 366.<br/>

KENNEDY, Dr., author of a foolish tragedy, iii. 238.<br/>

KENNEDY, House of, v. 374.<br/>

KENNICOTT, Dr. Benjamin,<br/>

  <i>Collations</i>, ii. 128;<br/>

  edition of the Hebrew Bible, v. 42;<br/>

  meets Johnson, iv. 151, n. 2.<br/>

KENNICOTT, Mrs., iv. 151, n. 2, 285, 288, 298, n. 2, 305.<br/>

KENNINGTON COMMON, iii. 239, n. 2.<br/>

KENRICK, Dr. William,<br/>

  account of him, i. 497;<br/>

  <i>Epistle to James Boswell, Esq</i>., ii. 61;<br/>

  Garrick libels, i. 498, n. 1;<br/>

  Goldsmith, libels, i. 498, n. 1; ii. 209, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson, attacks, i. 497; ii. 61; v. 273;<br/>

  made himself public, i. 498; iii. 256;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 44.<br/>

KENT, militia, i. 307, n. 4.<br/>

KEPLER, i. 85, n. 2.<br/>

KEPPEL, Admiral, iv. 12, n. 6.<br/>

KERR, James, v. 40.<br/>

KESWICK, iv. 437.<br/>

KETTLEWELL, John, iv. 286, n. 3.<br/>

KEYSLER, J. G., Travels, ii. 346.<br/>

KIDGELL, John, v. 270, n. 4.<br/>

KILLALOE, Bishop of. See DEAN BARNARD.<br/>

KILLINGLEY, M., iii. 208.<br/>

KILMARNOCK, Earl of, i. 180; v. 103, n, 1; 105.<br/>

KILMOREY, Lord, i. 83, n. 3; v. 433.<br/>

KIMCHI, Rabbi David, i. 33.<br/>

KINCARDINE, Alexander, Earl, and Veronica, Countess of,<br/>

v. 25, n. 2; 379, n. 3.<br/>

KINDNESS, duty of cultivating it, iii. 182.<br/>

KING, Captain, iv. 308, n. 3.<br/>

KING, Lord Chancellor, i. 359, n. 3.<br/>

KING, Henry, Bishop of Chichester, ii. 364, n. 1.<br/>

KING, Rev. Dr., a dissenter, iii. 288.<br/>

KING, Thomas, the Comedian, ii. 325, n. 1.<br/>

KING, William, Archbishop of Dublin,<br/>

  <i>Essay on the Origin of Evil</i>, ii. 37, n. 1; iii. 13, n. 3, 402, n. 1;<br/>

  troubles Swift, ii. 132, n. 2.<br/>

KING, Dr. William, Principal of St. Mary Hall, Oxford,<br/>

  account of him, i. 279, n. 5;<br/>

  his greatness, i. 282, n. 2;<br/>

  English of Atterbury, Gower, and Johnson, ii. 95, n. 2;<br/>

  Jacobite speech in 1754, i. 146, n. 1;<br/>

    in 1759, i. 348;<br/>

  Pretender in London, meets the, v. 196, n. 2;<br/>

    describes his meanness, v. 200, n. 1;<br/>

  Pulteney and Walpole, v. 339, n. 1.<br/>

<i>King, The, v. Topham</i>, iii. 16, n. 1.<br/>

KING'S EVIL,<br/>

  Johnson touched for it, i. 42;<br/>

  account of it, ib., n. 3.<br/>

'KING'S FRIENDS,' iv. 165, n. 3.<br/>

KING'S LIBRARY, i. 108.<br/>

KING'S PAINTER, iv. 368, n. 3.<br/>

KING'S Printing-house, ii. 323, n. 2.<br/>

KINGS,<br/>

  conversing with them, ii. 40, n. 3;<br/>

  flattered at church and on the stage, ii. 234;<br/>

  flatter themselves, ib.;<br/>

  great kings always social, i. 442;<br/>

  ill-trained, i. 442, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson ridicules them, i. 333;<br/>

  minister, should each be his own, ii. 117;<br/>

  oppressive kings put to death, ii. 170;<br/>

  praises exaggerated, ii. 38;<br/>

  reverence for them depends on their right, iv. 165;<br/>

  resistance to them sometimes lawful, i. 424;<br/>

  servants of the people, i. 321, n. 1;<br/>

  'the king can do no wrong,' i. 423;<br/>

  want of inherent right, iv. 170.<br/>

KINGSNORTON, i. 35, n. 1.<br/>

KINNOUL, Lord, ii. 211, n. 4.<br/>

KINVER, v. 455.<br/>

KIPPIS, Dr. Andrew,<br/>

  edits <i>Biographia Britannica</i>, iii. 174;<br/>

  his 'biographical catechism,' iv. 376;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 282; v. 88, n. 2.<br/>

KNAPTON, Messieurs, the booksellers, i. 183, 290, n. 2.<br/>

KNELLER, Sir Godfrey,<br/>

  as a Justice of the Peace, iii. 237;<br/>

  his portraits, iv. 77, n. 1.<br/>

KNIGHT, Captain, i. 378, n. 1.<br/>

KNIGHT, Joseph, a negro,<br/>

  account of him, iii. 214, n. 1;<br/>

  Cullen's answer, iii. 127;<br/>

  Maclaurin's plea, iii. 86, 88;<br/>

  Johnson offers a subscription, ib.;<br/>

    interested in him, iii. 95, 101, 129;<br/>

    <i>argument</i>, iii. 200, 202-3;<br/>

  decision, iii. 212, 216, 219.<br/>

KNIGHTON, i. 132, n. 1.<br/>

KNITTING, iii. 242.<br/>

KNIVES not provided in foreign inns, ii. 97, n. 1.<br/>

KNOLLES, Richard, <i>Turkish History</i>, i. 100.<br/>

KNOTTING, iii. 242; iv. 284.<br/>

KNOWLE, near Bristol, i. 353, n. 2.<br/>

KNOWLEDGE,<br/>

  all kinds of value, ii. 357;<br/>

  desirable per se, i. 417;<br/>

  desire of it innate, i. 458;<br/>

  diffusion of it not a disadvantage, iii. 37, 333;<br/>

  question of superiority, ii. 220;<br/>

  two kinds, ii. 365.<br/>

  See EDUCATION and LEARNING.<br/>

KNOWLES, Mrs., the Quakeress,<br/>

  courage and friendship, on, iii. 289;<br/>

  death, on, iii. 294;<br/>

  Johnson, meets, in 1776, iii. 78;<br/>

  in 1778, iii. 284-300;<br/>

  her account of the meeting, iii. 299, n. 2;<br/>

  describes his mode of reading, iii. 284;<br/>

  liberty to women, argues for, iii. 286;<br/>

  proselyte to  Quakerism, defends a, iii. 298;<br/>

  sutile pictures, her, iii. 299, n. 2.<br/>

KNOX, John, the Reformer,<br/>

  Cardinal Beaton's death, v. 63, n. 3;<br/>

  his 'reformations,' v. 6l;<br/>

  burial-place, ib., n. 4;<br/>

  set on a mob, v. 62;<br/>

  his posterity, v. 63.<br/>

KNOX, John, bookseller and author, ii. 304, 306.<br/>

KNOX, Rev. Dr. Vicesimus,<br/>

  <i>Boswell's Life of Johnson</i>, praises, iv. 391, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson's biographers, attacks, iv. 330, n. 2;<br/>

  imitates his style, i. 222, n. 1; iv. 390;<br/>

  Oxford, attacks, iii. 13, n. 3; iv. 391, n. 1;<br/>

  popularity as a writer, iv. 390, n. 2.<br/>

KRISTROM, Mr., ii. 156.<br/>
</p>

<h3>L.</h3>

<p><i>Labefactation</i>, ii. 367.
LABOUR, all men averse to it, ii. 98-99; iii. 20, n. 1.
LABRADOR, iv. 410, n. 6.
LA BRUYÈRE. See BRUYERE.
LACE, a suit of, ii. 352.
<i>Laceration</i>, ii. 106; iii. 419, n. 1.
<i>Lactantius</i>, iii. 133.
LADD, Sir John. See LADE.
LADE, Sir John,
  account of him, iv. 412, n. 1;
  Johnson's advice to him about marriage, ii. 109, n. 2;
  lines on him, iv. 413.
LADIES OF QUALITY, iii. 353.
LADY AT BATH, an empty-headed, iii. 48.
LAFELDT, battle of, iii. 251.
LAMB, Charles,
  account of Davies's recitation, i. 391, n. 2;
  Methodists saying grace, v. 123, n. 1;
  no one left to call him Charley, iii. 180, n. 3.
LANCASHIRE, militia, i. 307, n. 4.
LANCASTER, Boswell at the Assizes, iii. 261, n. 2.
LANCASTER, Dr., Provost of Queen's College, Oxford, i. 61, n. 1.
LANCASTER, House of, iii. 157.
LAND,
  advantage produced by selling it all at once, ii. 429;
  entails and natural right, ii. 416;
  investments in it, iv. 164; v. 232;
  part to be left in commerce, ii. 428.
LAND-TAX in Scotland, ii. 431.
LANDLORDS,
  leases, not giving, v. 304;
  rents, raising, ii. 102;
  right to control tenants at elections, ii. 167, 340;
  Scotch landlords, high situation of, i. 409;
  tenants, their dependancy, ii. 102;
    difficulty of getting, iv. 164;
    to be treated liberally, i. 462;
    under no obligation, ii. 102.
LANDOR, W. S., Johnson's geographical knowledge, i. 368, n. 1.
LANG, Dr., ii. 312, n. 3.
LANGBAINE, Gerard, iii. 30, n. 1.
LANGDON, Mr., iii. 207, n. 3.
LANGLEY, Rev. W., ii. 324, n. 1; iii. 138; v. 430.
LANGTON, Bennet,
  account of him, i. 247;
  <i>acceptum et expensum</i>, iv. 362;
  Addison and Goldsmith, compares, ii. 256;
  Addison's conversation, iii. 339;
  Aristophanes, reads, iv. 177, n. 3, 362;
  Barnes's Maccaronic verses, quotes, iii. 284;
  Beauclerk, his early friend, i. 248:
    makes him second guardian to his children, iii. 420;
    leaves him a portrait of Garrick, iv. 96;
  birth and matriculation at Oxford, i. 247, n. 1, 337;
  Blue stocking assembly, at a, v. 32, n. 3;
  Boswell, letter to, iii. 424;
  Boswell's obligations to him, ii. 456, n. 3;
  Burke and Johnson,  comparing Homer and Virgil, iii. 193, n. 3;
v. 79, n. 2;
  Burke's wit, i. 453, n. 2;
  carpenter and a clergyman's wife, anecdote of a, ii. 456, n. 3;
  children, his, too much about him, iii. 128;
    mentioned, ii. 146; iii. 89, 93, 104, 130;
  Clarendon's style, praises, iii. 257;
  coach, on the top of a, i. 477;
  collection of Johnson's sayings, iv. 1-34;
  daughters to be taught Greek, iv. 20, n. 2;
  dinners and suppers at his house, ii. 259; iii. 279, 280, 338;
  economy, no turn to, iii. 363, n. 2;
  expenditure and foibles criticised, iii. 48, n. 4, 93, 104, 128, 222,
300, 315, 317, 348, 362, 379; iv. 362;
  <i>frisk</i>, joins in a, i. 250;
  Greek, knowledge of, iv. 8, n. 3;
    Clenardus's <i>Greek Grammar</i>, iv. 20;
    recitation, ib., n. 2;
    professor in the imaginary college, v. 108;
  Hale, Sir Matthew, anecdote of, iv. 310;
  <i>Idler</i>, anecdote of the, i. 33l;
  introduces subjects on which people differ, iii. 186;
  Johnson, afraid of, iv. 295;
    at fairest advantage with him, i. 248, n. 3;
    bequest to him, iv. 402, n. 2;
      and Burke, an evening with, iv. 26;
    conversation before dinner, repeats, iii. 279;
    <i>confessor</i>, iv. 280-1;
    death, unfinished letter on, iv. 418, n. 1;
    deference to, iv. 8, n. 3;
    devotion to, when ill, iv. 266, n. 3;
      when dying, iv. 406-7, 414, n. 2, 439;
    dress as a dramatic author, describes, i. 200;
    estimate of Spence, v. 317, n. 1.
    first acquaintance with him, i. 247; iv. 145;
    friendship with him, iv. 132, 145, 352;
      rupture in it, ii. 256, n. 2, 261, n. 2, 265, 282; v. 89;
      reconciliation, ii. 292;
    funeral, at, iv. 419;
    gives him a copy of his letter to Chesterfield, i. 260;
    imitates, iv. 1, n. 2;
    Jacobitism, i. 430;
    letters to him: see under JOHNSON, letters;
    levee, attends, ii. 118;
    loan to him, ii. 136, n. 2; iv. 402, n. 2;
      repaid in an annuity to Barber, ib.;
    <i>Ode on Inchkenneth</i>, alters, ii. 295, n. 2;
    and Parr, an evening with, iv. 15;
    <i>poemata</i>, edits, ii. 295, n. 2; iv. 384; v. 155, n. 2, 326, n. 2;
    portrait, removes the inscription on, iv. 181;
    praises his worth, iii. 161;
       exclaims, '<i>Sit anima mea cum Langtono</i>,' iv. 280;
    <i>Prologue</i>, criticises, iv. 25;
    rebuked by, ii. 254;
    urges him to keep accounts, iv. 177, n. 3;
    visits him at Langton, i. 476, 477, n. 1;
      at Rochester, iv. 8, n. 3, 22, 232-3;
      at Warley Camp, iii. 360-2;
  King, gives the sketch of <i>Irene</i> to the, i. 108;
    and the catalogue of Johnson's projected works, iv. 381, n. 1;
  'Lanky,' ii. 258; v. 308;
  laughed at, iii. 338, n. 3;
  Lincoln, highly esteemed in, iii. 359;
  literary character, his, i. 248, n. 3;
  Literary Club, original member of the, i. 477;
  marries Lady Rothes, ii. 77, n. 1;
  militia, in the, iii. 123, 130, 360, 362, 368, 397;
    appointed Major, iii. 365, n. 1;
  <i>navigation</i>, his, ii. 136;
  Nicolaida visits him, ii. 379;
  orchard, has no, iv. 206;
  Paoli visits him at Rochester, iv. 8, n. 3;
  Paris, visits, i. 381;
  pedigree, his, i. 248, n. 1;
  personal appearance, i. 248, n. 3, 336;
  Pitt's neglect of Boswell, blames, iii. 213, n. 1;
  Pope reciting the last lines of the <i>Dunciad</i>, ii. 84, n. 2;
  religious discourse, introduces, ii. 254; iv. 216; v. 89;
  Richardson, introduced to, iv. 28;
  Round-Robin, refuses to sign the, iii. 84, n. 2;
  Royal Academy, professor of the, ii. 67, n. 1; iii. 464;
  ruining himself without pleasure, iii. 317, 348;
  <i>Rusticks</i>, writes, i. 358;
  school on his estate, establishes a, ii. 188;
  silent, too, iii. 260;
  sluggish, iii. 348;
  story, thought a story a, ii. 433;
  table, his, iii. 128, 186;
  talks from books, v. 378, n. 4;
  <i>Traveller</i>, praises the, iii. 252;
  Vesey's, Mr., an evening at, iii. 424; iv. i, n. 1;
  will, makes his, ii. 261;
  'worthy,' iii. 379, n. 4;
  Young, account of, iv. 59;
  mentioned, i. 336, 418, n. 1; ii. 34, n. 1, 63, 124, 141, n. 1, 186,
192, 232, 247, 279, 318, 338, 347, 350, 362, n. 2, 379; iii. 41, 119,
221, 250, 282, 326, 328, 354, 386, 417; iv. 71, 78, 197, 219, n. 3,
284, 317, 320, 344; v. 249, 295.
LANGTON, Cardinal Stephen, i. 248.
LANGTON, old Mr. (Bennet Langton's father),
  canal, his, iii. 47;
  exuberant talker, an, ii. 247;
  freedom from affectation, iv. 27;
  Johnson's Jacobitism, believes in, i. 430;
    in his being a Papist, i. 476;
    offers a living to, i. 320;
  picture, would not sit for his, iv. 4;
  stores of literature, his, iv. 27;
  mentioned, i. 357; ii. 16.
LANGTON, Mrs. (Bennet Langton's mother), i. 325, 357, 476; ii. 146;
iv. 4, 268.
LANGTON, George (Bennet Langton's eldest son), i. 248, n. 1; ii. 282;
iv. 146.
LANGTON, Miss Jane (Bennet Langton's daughter),
  Johnson's goddaughter, iii. 210, 11. 3; iv. 146, 268;
  his letter to her, iv. 271.
LANGTON, Miss Mary (Bennet Langton's daughter), iv. 268.
LANGTON, Peregrine (Bennet Langton's uncle), ii. 17-19.
LANGTON, in Lincolnshire,
  Johnson invited there, i. 288; ii. 142;
  visits it, i. 476, 477, n. 1; ii. 17;
    describes the house, v. 217.
LANGUAGES,
  formed on manners, ii. 80;
  origin, iv. 207;
  pedigree of nations, ii. 28; v. 225;
  scanty and inadequate, iv. 218;
  speaking one imperfectly lets a man down, ii. 404;
  writing verses in dead languages, ii. 371.
LANGUOR, following gaiety, iii. 199.
LANSDOWNE, Viscount (George Granville), <i>Drinking Song to Sleep</i>, i. 251.
LAPIDARY INSCRIPTIONS, ii. 407.
LAPLAND, i. 425; ii. 168, n, 1.
LAPLANDERS, v. 328.
LAPOUCHIN, Madame, iii. 340.
LASCARIS' <i>Grammar</i>, v. 459.
LAST, horror of the, i. 331, n. 7.
LATIN,
  beauty of Latin verse, i. 460;
  difficulty of mentioning in it modern names and titles, iv. 3, 10;
  essential to a good education, i. 457;
  few read it with pleasure, v. 80, n. 2;
  modern Latin poetry, i. 90, n. 2;
  pronunciation, ii. 404, n. 1.
  See EPITAPHS.
<i>Latiner</i>, a, iv. 185, n. 1.
LA TROBE, Mr., iv. 410.
LAUD, Archbishop,
  assists Lydiat, i. 194, n. 2;
  <i>Diary</i> quoted, ii. 214;
  his Scotch Liturgy, ii. 163.
LAUDER, William,
  account of his fraud about Milton, i. 228-231;
  deceives Johnson, i. 229, 231, n. 2.
LAUDERDALE, Duke of, Burnet's dedication to him, v. 285.
LAUGHERS, time to be spent with them, iv. 183.
LAUGHTER,
  a faculty which puzzles philosophers, ii. 378;
  Chesterfield, Johnson, Pope and Swift on it, ib., n. 2;
  laughing at a man to his face, iii. 338.
  See JOHNSON, laugh.
LAUREL, the, i. 185.
LAUSANNE, iv. 167, n. 1.
LA VALLIÈRE, Mlle, de, v. 49, n. 3.
LAVATER'S <i>Essay on Physiognomy</i>, iv. 421, n. 2.
LAW, Archdeacon, iii. 416.
LAW, Edmund, Bishop of Carlisle,
  Cambridge examinations, iii. 13, n. 3;
  parentheses, loved, iii. 402, n. 1;
  remarks on Pope's <i>Essay on Man</i>, ii. 37, n. 1; iii. 402, n. 1.
LAW, Robert, Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, i. 489.
LAW, William,
  Behmen, a follower of, ii. 122;
  each man's knowledge of his own guilt, iv. 294;
  Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>, cited in, iv. 4, n. 3;
  <i>Serious Call</i>,
    praised by Johnson, i. 68; ii. 122; iv. 286, n. 3, 311;
      by Gibbon, Wesley and Whitefield, i. 68, n. 2;
      by Psalmanazar, iii. 445.
LAW,
  Coke's definition of it, iii. 16, n. 1;
  honesty compatible with the practice of it, ii. 47, 48, n. 1; v. 26, 72;
  laws last longer than their causes, ii. 416;
  manners, made and repealed by, ii. 419;
  particular cases, not made for, iii. 25;
  primary notion is restraint, ii. 416;
  reports, English and Scotch, ii. 220;
  writers on it need not have practised it, ii. 430.
LAW-LORD, a dull, iv. 178.
LAWRENCE, Chauncy, iv. 70.
LAWRENCE, Sir Soulden, ii. 296, n. 1.
LAWRENCE, Dr. Thomas,
  account of him, ii. 296, n. 1;
  President of the College of Physicians, ii. 297; iv. 70;
  death, iv. 230, n. 2;
  illness, iv. 143-4;
  Johnson addresses to him an Ode, iv. 143, n. 2;
    learnt physic from him, iii. 22;
    long friendship with him, i. 82; iv. 143,144, n. 3
    (for his letters to him, see JOHNSON, letters);
  wife, death of his, iii. 418;
  mentioned, i. 83, 326; iii. 93, 123, 436; iv. 355.
LAWRENCE, Miss, i. 82; iv. 143;
  Johnson's letter to her, iv. 144, n. 3.
LAWYERS,
  barristers have less law than of old, ii. 158;
    'nobody reads now,' iv. 309;
    chance of success, iii. 179;
    Johnson's advice, iv. 309;
    Sir W. Jones's, ib., n. 6;
    Sir M. Hale's, iv. 310, n. 3;
  bookish men, good company for, iii. 306;
  Charles's, Prince, saying about them, ii. 214;
  consultations on Sundays, ii. 376;
  honesty: see under LAW;
  knowledge of great lawyers varied, ii. 158;
  multiplying words, iv. 74;
  players, compared with, ii. 235;
  plodding-blockheads, ii. 10;
  soliciting employment, ii. 430;
  work greatly mechanical, ii. 344.
LAXITY OF TALK. See JOHNSON, laxity.
LAY-PATRONS. See SCOTLAND, Church.
LAYER, Richard, i. 157.
LAZINESS, worse than the toothache, v. 231.
LEA, Rev. Samuel, i. 50.
LEANDRO ALBERTI, ii. 346; v. 310.
LEARNED GENTLEMAN, a, ii. 228.
LEARNING,
  decay of it, i. 445; iv. 20; v. 80;
  degrees of it, iv. 13;
  difficulties, v. 316;
  giving way to politics, i. 157, n. 2;
  important in the common intercourse of life, i. 457;
  'more generally diffused,' iv. 217;
  trade, a, v. 59: see AUTHORS.
LEASOWES, v. 267, n. 1, 457.
LECKY, W.E.H., History of England, ii. 130, n. 3.
LE CLERK, i. 285.
LECTURES, teaching by, ii. 7; iv. 92.
LE DESPENCER, Lord, ii. 135, n. 2.
<i>Ledger, The</i>, iv. 22, n. 3.
LEE, Alderman, iii. 68, n. 3, 78, 79, n. 2.
LEE, Arthur, iii. 68, 76, 79, n. 2.
LEE, John (Jack Lee),
  account of him, iii. 224, n. 1;
  at the bar of the House of Commons, iii. 224;
  on the duties of an advocate, ii. 48, n. 1.
LEECHMAN, Principal William,
  account of him, v. 68, n. 4;
  Johnson calls on him, v. 370;
  writes on prayer, v. 68;
    answered by Cumming, v. 101.
LEEDS, iii. 399, 400.
LEEDS, Duke of, verses on his marriage, iv. 14.
LEEDS, fifth Duke of,
  member of the Literary Club, i. 479;
  mentioned, ii. 34, n. 1.
LEEK, in Staffordshire, i. 37; iii. 136.
LE FLEMING, Bishop of Carlisle, i. 461, n. 4.
LE FLEMING, Sir Michael, i. 461, n. 4.
<i>Leeward</i>, i. 293.
LEEWARD ISLANDS, ii. 455.
LEGITIMATION, ii. 456.
LEGS, putting them out in company, iii. 54.
LEIBNITZ,
  controversy with Clarke, v. 287;
  on the derivation of languages, ii. 156;
  mentioned, i. 137.
LEICESTER, iii. 4; iv. 402, n. 2.
LEICESTER, Robert Dudley, Earl of, v. 438.
LEICESTER, Mr. (Beauclerk's relation), iii. 420.
LEISURE,
  for intellectual improvement, ii. 219;
  sickness from it, a disease to be dreaded, iv. 352.
LELAND, Counsellor, iii. 318.
LELAND, John, <i>Itinerary</i>, v. 445.
LELAND, Dr. Thomas,
  <i>History of Ireland</i>, ii. 255; iii. 112;
  Hurd, attacked by, iv. 47, n. 2;
  Johnson's letters to him, i. 489, 518; ii. 2, n. 1;
  mentioned, iii. 310.
LEMAN, Sir William, i. 174, n. 2.
LEMAN, Lake, iv. 350, n. 1.
LENDING MONEY, influence gained by it, ii. 167.
LENNOX, Mrs.,
  character by Mrs. Thrale, iv. 275, n. 2;
  lived to a great age, ib., n. 3;
  English version of Brumoy, publishes an, i. 345;
  <i>Female Quixote</i>, i. 367;
  Goldsmith advised to hiss her play, iv. 10;
  Johnson cites her in his <i>Dictionary</i>, iv. 4, n. 3;
    writes <i>Proposals</i> for publishing her <i>Works</i>, ii. 289;
    gives a supper in her honour, i. 255, n. 1;
  <i>Shakespeare Illustrated</i>, i. 255;
  superiority, her, iv. 275;
  <i>Translation of Sully's Memoirs</i>, i. 309.
LEOD, v. 233.
LEONI, ——, the singer, iii. 21, n. 2.
<i>Leonidas</i>, v. 116.
LE ROY, Julien, ii. 390, 391.
LESLEY, John, <i>History of Scotland</i>, ii. 273.
LESLIE, Charles, the nonjuror, iv. 286, n. 3.
LESLIE, C. R., anecdote of the Countess of Corke, iv. 108, n. 4.
LESLIE, Professor, of Aberdeen, v. 92.
LESSEPS, M. de, v. 400, n. 4.
<i>Let ambition fire thy mind,</i> iii. 197.
<i>Lethe</i>, i. 228.
<i>Letter to Lord Chesterfield</i> published separately, i. 261, n. 1.
<i>Letter to John Dunning, Esq.</i>, i. 297, n. 2.
LETTER-WRITING, iv. 102.
LETTERS,
  none received in the grave, iv. 413;
  studied endings, v. 238. See DATES.
<i>Letters from Italy</i>, iii. 55. See SHARP, Samuel.
<i>Letters of an English Traveller</i>, iv. 320, n. 4.
<i>Letters on the English Nation</i>, v. 113.
<i>Letter to Dr. Samuel Johnson occasioned by his late political
Publications</i>, ii. 316.
<i>Letters to Lord Mansfield</i>, ii. 229. See ANDREW STUART.
<i>Letters to the People of England</i>, iv. 113, n. 1.
<i>Lettre de cachet</i>, v. 206.
<i>Lettres Persanes</i>, iii. 291, n. 1.
LETTSOM, Dr., iii. 68.
LEVEE, Johnson's. See under JOHNSON.
LEVEES, Ministers', ii. 355.
LEVELLERS, i. 448.
LEVER, Sir Ashton, iv. 335.
LEVETT, John, of Lichfield, i. 81;
  Johnson's letter to him, i. 160;
  unseated as member for Lichfield, i. 161, n. 1.
LEVETT, Robert,
  account of him, i. 243;
  awkward and uncouth, iii. 22;
  brothers, his, iv. 143;
  brutality in manners, iii. 461;
  complains of the kitchen, ii. 215, n. 4;
  death, iv. 137, 142, 145;
  Desmoulins, hates, iii. 368;
  '<i>Doctor</i> Levett,' ii. 214;
  Johnson's birth-day dinners, present at, iii. 157, n. 3; iv. 135, n. 1;
    companion, i. 232, n. 1; ii. 5, n. 1; iii. 220; iv. 145, 233,
249, n. 2;
    introduced Langton to, i. 47; iv. 145;
    letters to him: See under JOHNSON, letters;
    lines on him, iv. 137, 165, 274, 303, n. 2;
    questioned about, iii. 57;
    his recommendation to, i. 417;
    writings, makes out a list of, iii. 321;
  Johnson's Court, garret in, ii. 5;
  marriage, i. 370, 382;
  mentioned, i. 81, n. 1, 435; iii. 26, 93, 363, 373; iv. 92.
LEWIS LE GROS, iii. 32, n. 5.
LEWIS XIV,
  celebrated in many languages, i. 123;
  charges accumulated on him, ii. 341, n. 4;
  discontent and ingratitude, on, ii. 167, n. 3;
  King of Siam sends him ambassadors, iii. 336;
  La Vallière, Mlle. de, v. 49, n. 3;
  manners, ii. 41;
  torture used in his reign, i. 467, n. 1;
  why endured by the French, ii. 170.
LEWIS XVI,
  execution, ii. 396, n. 1;
  Hume, when a child makes a set speech to, ii. 401, n. 4;
  Johnson, seen by, ii. 385, 394-5;
  Paoli, gives high office in Corsica to, ii. 71, n. 1;
  torture used in his reign, i. 467, n. 1.
LEWIS XVIII, when a child makes a set speech to Hume, ii. 401, n. 4.
LEWIS, David,
  verses to Pope, iv. 307;
  <i>Miscellany</i>, ib., n. 3.
LEWIS, Dean, i. 370, n. 1, 382.
LEWIS, F., translates mottoes for the <i>Rambler</i>, i. 225.
LEWSON, Mrs., iii. 425.
LEXICOGRAPHER,
  defined, i. 296;
  Bolingbroke's anecdote of one, ib., n. 3;
  referred to in the <i>Rambler</i>, i. 189, n. 1.
LEXIPHANES, ii. 44.
LEYDEN, iv. 241; v. 376.
LIBELS,
  actions for them, iii. 64;
  dead, on the, iii. 15;
  England and America, in, i. 116, n. 1;
  Fox's Libel Bill, iii. 16, n. 1;
  juries, judges of the law, iii. 16, n. 1;
    refuse to convict, i. 116, n. 1;
  pulpit, from the, iii. 58;
  severe law against libels, i. 124, n. 1.
LIBERTY,
  all <i>boys</i> love it, iii. 383;
  clamours for it, i. 131, n. 1; iii. 201, n, 1;
  conscience, of, ii. 249; iv. 216;
  destroying a portion of it without necessity, iii. 224;
  liberty and licentiousness, ii. 130;
  luxury, effects of, ii. 170;
  political and private, ii. 60, 170;
  press, of the: See PRESS;
  pulpit, of the, iii. 59;
  <i>taedium vitae</i>, kept off by the notion of it, i. 394;
  teaching, of, ii. 249; iv. 216;
  thinking, preaching, and acting, of, ii. 252.
LIBERTY and Necessity. See FREE WILL.
LIBRARIES,
  Johnson helps in forming the King's library, ii. 33, n. 4;
    describes the Oxford libraries, ii. 35, 67, n. 2;
  key of one always lost, v. 65;
  <i>Stall Library</i>, iii. 91.
LICENSING ACT for plays, i. 141, n. 1.
LICHFIELD,
  ale, ii. 461; iv. 97;
  antiquities, iv. 369;
  <i>Beaux Stratagem</i>, scene of the, ii. 461, n. 3;
  Bishop's palace, ii. 467;
  Boswell and Johnson visit it in 1776, ii. 461;
  Boswell shown real 'civility,' iii. 77;
  Boswell visits it in 1779, iii. 411-2;
  boys dipped in the font, i. 91, n. 1;
  Cathedral, i. 81, n. 2; ii. 466; v. 456;
    Johnson in the porch, ii. 466, n. 3;
  city of philosophers, ii. 464;
  city and county in itself, i. 36, n. 4;
  coach-journey from London, i. 340, n. 1;
    postchaise, iii. 411;
  Darwin's house, v. 428, n. 3;
  drunk, all the <i>decent</i> people got, v. 59;
  English spoken there, purity of the, ii. 463-4;
  <i>Evelina</i> not heard of there, ii. 463, n. 4;
  Friary, The, ii. 466; iii. 412;
  George Inn, iii. 411;
  Green's museum, ii. 465; iii. 412; v. 428;
  Hospital, v. 445;
  Hutton describes the town in 1741, i. 86, n. 2;
  Jacobite fox-hunt, iii. 326, n. 1;
  Johnson, Michael, a magistrate, i, 36; ii. 322, n. 1;
  Johnson, his barber, ii. 52, n. 2;
    beloved in his native city, ii. 469;
      respect  shown him by the corporation, iv. 372, n. 2;
    defines it in his <i>Dictionary</i>, iv. 372;
    hopes to set a good example, iv. 135;
    house, i. 75; ii. 461; iv. 372, n. 2; 402, n. 2;
    Latin verses to a stream, iii. 92, n, 1;
    as Lord Lichfield, iii. 310;
    loses three old friends, iv. 366;
    monument in the Cathedral, iv. 423;
    portrait admired there, ii. 141;
    saucer in the Museum, iii. 220, n. 1;
    theatre, tosses a man into the pit of the, ii. 299;
      in love with an actress, ii. 464;
      praises an actor, ii. 465;
      attends it with Boswell, ii. 464-5, 471;
    visits the town for the first time after living in London, i. 370;
      last visit, iv. 372;
      (for his other visits see iii. 450-3);
    weary of it, ii. 52;
    willow tree, iv. 372, n. 1;
  lecture on experimental philosophy, v. 108;
  manufactures, ii. 464;
  oat ale and cakes, ii. 463;
  people sober and genteel, ii. 463;
  population in 1781, iii. 450;
  Prerogative Court, i. 81, 101;
  Sacheverell preaches there, i. 39, n. 1;
  <i>Salve, magna parens</i>, iv. 372;
  school, account of it in Johnson's time, i. 43-9;
    compared with Stourbridge School, i. 50;
    buildings dilapidated, i. 45, n. 4;
    endowment, v. 445, n. 3;
    famous scholars, i. 45;
  service for a sick woman, v. 444;
  Seward's, Miss, verses on it, iv. 331;
  St. Mary's Church repaired, i. 67;
    Johnson attends it in 1776, ii. 466;
  St. Michael's Church, graves of Johnson's parents and brother, iv. 393;
  Stowhill, ii. 470; iii. 412;
  Swan Inn, v. 428;
  Thrales, the, visit it in 1774 with Johnson, v. 428, 440, n. 2;
  Three Crowns Inn, ii. 461; iii. 411;
  <i>Warner's Tour</i>, iv. 373, n. 1.
LICHFIELD, fourth Earl of, iii. 309.
LICHFIELD, Leonard, an Oxford bookseller, i. 61, n. 3.
LIDDELL, Sir Henry, ii. 168, n. 1.
LIES,
  'Consecrated lies,' i. 355;
  disarm their own force, ii. 221;
  Johnson's <i>Adventurer</i> on lying, ii. 221, n. 2;
    use of the word <i>lie</i>, iv. 49;
  lying to the public, ii. 223;
  servants 'not at home,' i. 436;
  to the sick, iv. 306;
  of vanity, iv. 167:
  See FALSEHOOD and TRUTH.
LIFE,
  changes in its form desirable at times, iii. 128;
  changes in its modes, ii. 96: See under MANNERS;
  choice, few have any, iii. 363;
  just choice impossible, ii. 22, 114;
  climate, not affected by, ii. 195;
  composed of small incidents, i. 433, n. 4; ii. 359, n. 2;
  domestick life little touched by public affairs, i. 381;
  Dryden's lines, ii. 124; iv. 303;
  every season has its proper duties, v. 63;
  expecting more from it than life will afford, ii. 110;
  happiest part lying awake in the morning, v. 352;
  imbecility in its common occurrences, iii. 300;
  method, to be thrown into a, iii. 94;
  miseries, i. 299, n. 1, 331, n. 6;
  'balance of misery,' iv. 300;
  'nauseous draught,' iii. 386;
  none would live it again, ii. 125, iv. 301-3;
  pain better than death, iii. 296; iv. 374;
  progress from want to want, iii. 53;
  progression, must be in, iv. 396, n. 4;
  state of weariness, ii. 382;
  studied in a great city, iii. 253;
  system of life not easily disturbed, ii. 102;
  a well-ordered poem, iv. 154.
<i>Life of Alfred</i>, Johnson projects a, i. 177.
LILLIBURLERO, ii. 347.
LILLIPUT, Senate of, i. 115.
LILLY, William, iii. 172.
LINCOLN,
  a City and County, i. 36, n. 4;
  visited by Boswell, iii. 359.
LINCOLN'S INN, Society of, iv. 290, n. 4.
LINCOLNSHIRE,
  militia, i. 36, n. 4; iii. 361;
  orchards very rare, iv. 206;
  reeds, v. 263;
  mentioned, v. 286.
<i>Line</i>, the civil, iii. 196.
LINEN, v. 216.
<i>Linguae Latinae Liber Dictionarius</i>, i. 294, n. 6.
LINLEY, Miss, ii. 369, n. 2.
LINLITHGOW, Earl of, v. 103, n. 1.
LINTOT, Bernard, the bookseller,
  quarrels with Pope, i. 435, n. 4;
  mentioned, ii, 133, n. 1; iv. 80, n. 1.
LINTOT the younger,
  Johnson said to have written for him, i. 103;
  his warehouse, i. 435.
LIQUORS, scale of, iii. 381; iv. 79.
LISBON,
  earthquake, i. 309, n. 3;
  parliamentary vote of £100,000 for relief, i. 353, n. 2;
  packet boat to England, iv. 104, n. 3;
  persecution of Malagrida, iv. 174, n. 5;
  postage to London, iii. 22;
  mentioned, ii. 211, n. 4.
<i>Literary Anecdotes</i>, Nichols's, iv. 369, n. 1.
LITERARY CLUB. See CLUBS.
LITERARY FAME, ii. 69, n. 3, 233, 353.
LITERARY friend, a pompous, iv. 236.
LITERARY IMPOSTORS. See IMPOSTORS.
LITERARY JOURNALS, ii. 39.
<i>Literary Magazine or Universal Review</i>, i. 307, 320, 328, 505.
LITERARY man, life of a, iv. 98.
LITERARY PROPERTY. See COPYRIGHT.
LITERARY REPUTATION, ii. 233.
LITERARY REVIEWS. See Critical and Monthly.
LITERATURE,
  amazing how little there is, iii. 303, n. 4;
  dignity, its, iii. 310;
  England, neglected in, ii. 447, n. 5;
    before France in it, iii. 254;
  general courtesy of literature, iv. 246;
  generally diffused, iv. 217, n. 4;
  how far injured by abundance of books, iii. 332;
  respect paid to it, iv. 116;
  wearers of swords and powdered wigs ashamed to be illiterate, iii. 254.
LITTLE THINGS,
  contentment with them, iii. 241;
  danger of it, iii. 242.
LITTLETON, Adam, i. 294, n. 6.
LIVELINESS, study of, ii. 463.
LIVERPOOL, iii. 416.
LIVERPOOL, first Earl of. See JENKINSON, Charles.
LIVERPOOL, third Earl of, iii. 146, n. 1.
LIVES OF THE POETS,
  account of its publication
    advertised, iii. 108;
    <i>Advertisement</i>, iv. 35, n. 1;
    Johnson's engagement with the booksellers, iii. 109;
    design greatly enlarged, iv. 35;
    payment agreed on, iii. 111;
    extraordinarily moderate, ib., n. 1;
      £100 added, iv. 35;
    payment for a separate edition, ib., n. 3;
    progress of their composition, iii. 313, 317, n. 1;
    first four volumes published, iii. 370, 380, n. 3;
    Johnson's indolence in finishing the last six, iii. 418, 435;
iv. 34, 58, n. 3;
    published, iv. 34;
    printed separately, iv. 35, n. 3, 63;
    additions, ib., n. 1.
    reprinting, iv. 153;
    new edition, iv. 157;
  attacks expected, iii. 375;
  attacked, iv. 63-5;
  booksellers, impudence of the, iv. 35, n. 3;
  Boswell has the proof sheets, iii. 371;
    and most of the manuscript, iv. 36, 71, 72;
    his observations on some of the <i>Lives</i>, iv. 38-63;
  commended generally, iv. 146;
  contemporaries, difficulty in writing the <i>Lives</i> of, iii. 155, n. 3;
  copies presented to Mrs. Boswell, iii. 372;
    to the King, ib., n. 3;
    to Wilkes, iv. 107;
    to Langton, iv. 132;
    to Bewley, iv. 134;
    to Rev. Mr. Wilson, iv. 162;
    to Cruikshank, iv. 240;
    to Miss Langton, iv. 267;
    to Johnson's physicians, iv. 399, n. 5;
  Dilly's account of the undertaking, iii. 110;
  Johnson's anger at an indecent poem being inserted, iv. 36, n. 4;
    collects materials, iii. 427;
    not the <i>editor</i> of this Collection of Poets, iii. 117, n. 8, 137,
370; iv. 35, n. 3;
    inattention to minute accuracy, iii. 359, n. 2;
    letters to Nichols the printer, iv. 36, n. 4;
    portraits in different editions, iv. 421, n. 2;
    recommends the insertion of four poets, iii. 370; iv. 35, n. 3;
    trusted much to his memory, iv. 36, n. 3;
  Nichols, printed by, iv. 36, 63, n. 1, 321;
  piety, written so as to promote, iv. 34;
  Rochester's <i>Poems</i> castrated by Steevens, iii. 191;
  rough copy sent to the press, iv. 36;
  Savage, many of the anecdotes from, i. 164;
  titles suggested, iv. 36, n. 4;
  words, learned, iv. 39.
<i>Lives of the Poets</i> (Bell's edition), ii. 453, n. 2; iii. 110.
<i>Lives of the Poets</i>, by Theophilus Cibber, i. 187; iii. 29-30.
LIVINGS, inequality of, ii. 172.
LIVY, i. 506; ii. 342.
LLANDAFF, Bishopric of, iv. 118, n. 2.
LLOYD, A., <i>Account of Mona</i>, v. 450.
LLOYD (Llwyd), Humphry, v. 438.
LLOYD, Mrs., Savage's god-mother, i. 172.
LLOYD, Olivia, i. 92.
LLOYD, Robert, the poet,
  account of him, i. 395, n. 2;
  <i>Connoisseur</i>, i. 420, n. 3; ii. 334, n. 3;
  <i>Odes to Obscurity</i>, ii. 334.
LLOYD, Mr. and Mrs. Sampson,
  Boswell and Johnson dine with them, ii. 456, 457;
  <i>Barclay's Apology</i>, ii. 458;
  observance of days, ii. 458.
LLOYD, William, Bishop of St. Asaph,
  his learning in ready cash, ii. 256, n. 3;
  his palace, v. 437.
LLOYD, ——, of Maesmynnan, v. 445.
LLOYD, ——, schoolmaster of Beaumaris, v. 447.
LOAN, government, raised at eight per cent, in 1779, iii. 408; n. 4.
<i>Lobo's Abyssinia</i>,
  Johnson translates it, i. 78, n. 2, 86-9, 340, n. 3;
    sees a copy in his old age, iii. 7.
<i>Loca Solennia</i>, Boswell writes to Johnson from, ii. 3, n. 1.
LOCAL,
  attachment, ii. 103;
  consequence, ii. 133;
  histories, iv. 218, n. 1;
  sanctity, ii. 276.
LOCHBUY, Laird of,
  Johnson visits him, v. 341-3;
  his dungeon, v. 343.
LOCHBUY, Lady, v. 341-3.
LOCHIEL, Chief of, v. 297, n. 1.
LOCKE, John,
  anecdote of him and Dr. Clarke, i. 3, n. 2;
  <i>Common-Place Book</i>, i. 204;
  exportation of coin, on the, iv. 105;
  last words to Collins, iii. 363, n. 3;
  Latin Verses, v. 93-5;
  style, iii. 257, n. 3;
  <i>Treatise on Education</i>, cold bathing for children, i. 91, n. 1;
    the proper age for travelling, iii. 458;
    whipping an infant, ii. 184;
  Watts, Dr., answered by, ii. 408, n. 3.
LOCKE, William, of Norbury Park, iv. 43.
LOCKHART, Sir George, v. 227, n. 4.
LOCKHART, J. G.,
  <i>Captain Carleton's Memoirs</i>, on the authorship of, iv. 334, n. 4;
  Johnson on the Royal Marriage Bill, ii. 152, n. 2;
  Scott and the <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>, i. 193, n. 3.
LOCKMAN, J., i. 115, n. 1;
  '<i>l'illustre Lockman</i>,' iv. 6.
LODGING-HOUSE LANDLORDS, i. 422.
LOFFT, Capel,
  account of him, iv. 278;
  his <i>Reports</i> quoted, iii. 87, n. 3.
LOMBE, John, iii. 164.</p>

<h5>LONDON</h5>

<h5>I.</h5>

<p>LONDON,<br/>

  advantages of it, ii. 120;<br/>

  Black Wednesday, v. 196, n. 3;<br/>

  bones gathered for various uses, iv. 204;<br/>

  Boswell's love for London: See BOSWELL, London;<br/>

  buildings, new, iv. 209;<br/>

    rents not fallen in consequence, iii. 56, 226;<br/>

  Burke, described by, iii. 178, n. 1;<br/>

  burrow, near one's, i. 82, n. 3; iii. 379;<br/>

  censure escaped in it, See below, freedom from censure;<br/>

  centre of learning, ii. 75;<br/>

  circulating libraries, i. 102, n. 2; ii. 36. n. 2;<br/>

  City, aldermen, political divisions among the, iii. 460;<br/>

    Camden, Lord, honours shown to, ii. 353, n. 2;<br/>

    Common-Council, inflammable, ii. 164;<br/>

      petitions for mercy to Dodd, iii. 120, n. 3, 143;<br/>

      subscribes to Carte's <i>History</i>, i. 42, n. 3;<br/>

    contest with House of Commons, ii. 300, n. 5; iii. 459-60; iv. 139;<br/>

    division in the popular party, iii. 460; iv. 175, n. 1;<br/>

    King, presents a remonstrance to the (1770), iii. 460;<br/>

      an Address (1770), iii. 201, n. 3;<br/>

      an Address (1781), iv. 139, n. 4;<br/>

      'leans towards him' (1784), iv. 266;<br/>

      'in unison with the Court' (1791), iv. 329, n. 3;<br/>

    Lord Mayors not elected by seniority, iii. 356, 459-60;<br/>

    ministers for seven years not asked to the Lord Mayor's feast, iii. 460;<br/>

    Wilkes, the Chamberlain, iv. 101, n. 2;<br/>

  City-poet, iii. 75;<br/>

  City, women of the, iii. 353;<br/>

  Culloden, news of, v. 196, n. 3;<br/>

  dangers from robbers in 1743, i. 163, n. 2;<br/>

    Johnson attacked, ii. 299;<br/>

  'dangers of the night,' i. 119, n. 1;<br/>

  dear to men of letters, ii. 133;<br/>

  deaths, from hunger, iii: 401;<br/>

    from all causes, iv. 209;<br/>

  eating houses unsociable, i. 400;<br/>

  economy, a place for, iii. 378;<br/>

  freedom from censure, ii. 356; iii. 378;<br/>

  Gibbon loves its dust, iii. 178, n. 1;<br/>

    and the liberty that it gives, iii. 379, n. 2;<br/>

  gin-shops, iii. 292, n. 1;<br/>

  glasshouses, i. 164, n. 1;<br/>

  Gordon riots, iii. 427-31;<br/>

  greatest series of shops in the world, ii. 218;<br/>

  hackney-coaches, number of, iv. 330;<br/>

  happiness to be had out of it, iii. 363;<br/>

  heaven upon earth, iii. 176, 378;<br/>

  hospitality, ii. 222;<br/>

  hospitals, iii. 53, n. 5;<br/>

  increase, complaints of its, iii. 226;<br/>

  influence extended everywhere, ii. 124;<br/>

  intellectual pleasure, affords, iii. 5, 378; iv. 164; v. 14;<br/>

  Irish chairmen, ii. 101;<br/>

  Johnson loves it, i. 320; ii. 75, 120; iii. 5; iv. 358;<br/>

    returns to it to die, iv. 374-5;<br/>

  life on £30 a year, i. 105;<br/>

  <i>London</i>, described in Johnson's, i. 118;<br/>

  London-bred men strong, ii. 101; iv. 210;<br/>

  magnitude and variety, i. 421; ii. 75, 473; iii. 21; iv. 201;<br/>

  Minorca, compared with life in, iii. 246;<br/>

  mobs and illuminations, iii. 383: see below, riots;<br/>

  mortality of children, iv. 209;<br/>

  parish, a London, ii. 128;<br/>

  pavement, the new, v. 84, n. 3;<br/>

  Pekin, compared with, v. 305;<br/>

  population not increased, iv. 209;<br/>

  preferable to all other places, iii. 363, 378;<br/>

  press-gangs not suffered to enter the city in Sawbridge's Mayoralty,<br/>

iii. 460;<br/>

  Recorder's report to the King of sentences of death, iii. 121, n. 1;<br/>

  relations in London, ii. 177;<br/>

  Reynolds's  love of it, iii. 178, n. 1;<br/>

  riots in 1768. ii. 60, n. 2; iii. 46, n. 5;<br/>

  shoe-blacks, ii. 326; iii. 262;<br/>

  shopkeeper  compared with a savage, v. 81, 83;<br/>

  slaughter-houses, v. 247;<br/>

  society, compared with Paris, iii. 253;<br/>

  strikes, iii. 46, n. 5;<br/>

  theatre, proposal for a third, iv. 113;<br/>

  tires of it, no man, iii. 178;<br/>

    Boswell will tire of it, iii. 353;<br/>

  too large, ii. 356;<br/>

  Trained Bands, iv. 319;<br/>

  universality, ii. 133;<br/>

  wall, taking the, i. 110; v. 230;<br/>

  wits, ii. 466;<br/>

  wheat, price of, in 1778, iii. 226, n. 2.<br/>
</p>

<p>II. Localities.</p>

<p>LONDON,
  Aldersgate Street, Milton's School, ii. 407, n. 5;
  Anchor Brewhouse, i. 491, n. 1;
  Argyll Street, Johnson's room in Mrs. Thrale's house, iii. 405, n. 6;
iv. 157, 164;
  Bank of England, Jack Wilkes defends it against the rioters, iii. 430;
  Barking Creek, iii. 268, n. 4;
  Barnard's Inn, No. 6, Oliver Edward's chambers, iii. 303;
  Batson's coffee-house, frequented by physicians, iii. 355, n. 2;
  Baxter's (afterwards Thomas's), Dover Street, Literary Club met there,
i. 479, n. 2; v. 109, n. 5;
  Bedford Coffee-house, Garrick attacks Dodsley's <i>Cleone</i>, i. 325, n. 3;
  Bedford Street, 'old' Mr. Sheridan's house, i. 485, n. 1;
  Billingsgate, Johnson, Beauclerk and Langton row to it, i. 251;
    Johnson and Boswell take oars for Greenwich, i. 458;
    Johnson lands there, iv. 233, n. 2;
  Black Boy, Strand, Johnson dates a letter from it, iii. 405, n. 6;
  Blackfriars, Boswell and Johnson cross in a boat to it, ii. 432;
  Blackfriars  bridge, Johnson's letter about the design for it, i. 351;
  Blenheim Tavern, Bond Street, meeting place of the Eumelian Club,
iv. 394, n. 4;
  Boar's Head, Eastcheap, a Shakesperian Club, v. 247;
  Bolt Court,
    Boswell takes his last leave of Johnson at the entry, iv. 338;
    Johnson's last house, ii. 427; iii. 405, n. 6;
    garden, ii. 427, n. 1;
    burnt down, ib.;
    described in Pennant's <i>London</i>, iii. 275;
    Oxford post-coach takes up Boswell  and Johnson there, iv. 283;
  Bond Street, i. 174, n. 2; iv. 387, n. 1;
  Bow Church, confirmation of Bishop Hampden's election, iv. 323, n. 3;
  Bow Street, Johnson resides there, iii. 405, n. 6;
    Sir John Fielding's office, i. 423;
  Bridewell Churchyard, Levett buried there, iv. 137;
  British Coffee House,
    Boswell and Johnson dine there, ii. 195;
    club, account of a, iv. 179, n. 1;
    Guthrie and Captain Cheap, i. 117, n. 2;
  Buckingham House, ii. 33, n. 3;
  Butcher Row,
    account of it, i. 400, n. 2;
    Boswell and Johnson dine there, i. 400;
    meet Edwards there, iii. 302;
  Button's Coffee-house,
    Addison frequented it, iv. 91, n. 1;
    Dryden <i>said</i> to have had his winter and summer chairs there,
iii. 71, n. 5;
  Carlisle House, iv. 92, n. 5;
  Castle Street, Cavendish Square,
    Johnson lodged there, i. 111, 135, n. 1; iii. 405, n. 6;
    visited the Miss Cotterells, i. 244;
  Catherine Street, Strand,
    Johnson describes a tavern, v. 230;
    lodged near it, i. 103; iii. 405, n. 6;
  Charing Cross, full tide of human existence, ii. 337; iii. 450;
  Charing Cross to Whitechapel, the greatest series of shops in the
world, ii. 218;
  Clerkenwell, an alehouse where Johnson met Mr. Browne, i. 113, n. 1;
  Clerkenwell Bridewell, broken open in the Gordon Riots, iii. 429;
    described in <i>Humphry Clinker</i>, ii. 123, n. 2;
  Clifford's Inn, Lysons lived there, iv. 402, n. 2;
  Clifton's eatinghouse, i. 400;
  Clubs: See under CLUBS;
  Coachmaker's Hall, Boswell attends a religious Robinhood Society,
iv. 93, 95;
  Compters, The, iii. 432;
  Conduit Street, Boswell lodges there, ii. 166;
  Cornhill, iv. 233, n. 2;
  Covent Garden,
    election mob, iv. 279, n. 2;
    Hummums, iii. 349, n. 1;
    Johnson helps the fruiterers, i. 250;
    Piazzas infested by robbers, i. 163, n. 2;
  Covent Garden Theatre,
    <i>Douglas</i>, v. 362, n. 1;
    Johnson at an oratorio, ii. 324, n. 3;
      his prologue to Kelly's comedy, iii. 114;
    Maddocks the straw-man, iii. 231;
    <i>She Stoops to Conquer</i> in rehearsal, ii. 208;
    <i>Sir Thomas Overbury</i>, iii. 115, n. 2;
    time of sickness, ii. 410, n. 2;
  Crown and Anchor Tavern, Strand,
    Boswell's supper party, ii. 63, 186; iii. 41;
    Boswell and Johnson dine there, ii. 192;
  Cuper's Gardens, v. 295;
  Curzon Street, Lord Marchmont's house, iii. 392;
  Doctors' Commons, i. 462, n. 1;
  Dover Street, Literary Club met at Baxter's and Le Telier's, i. 479;
  Downing Street,
    Boswell's lodgings, i. 422;
    Lord North's residence, ii. 331;
  Drury Lane Theatre,
    Abington's, Mrs., benefit, ii. 324;
    <i>Beggar's Opera</i> refused, iii. 321, n. 3;
    Boswell lows like a cow, v. 396;
    <i>Comus</i> acted, i. 227;
    Davies's benefit, iii. 249;
    <i>Earl of Essex</i>, iv. 312, n. 5;
    Fleetwood's management, i. 111, n. 2;
    Garrick, opened by, i. 181;
    Goldsmith and Lord Shelburne there, iv. 175, n. 1;
    <i>Irene</i> performed, i. 153, 196-8, 200-1;
    Johnson in the Green Room, i. 201; iv. 7;
    management by Booth, Wilks, and Cibber, v. 244, n. 2;
  Duke Street, St. James's, No. 10, Mrs. Bellamy's lodgings, iv.
244, n. 2;
  Durham Yard,
    Johnson mentions it in dating a letter, iii. 405, n. 6;
    the site of the Adelphi, ii. 325, n. 3;
  East-India House, John Hoole one of the clerks, ii. 289, n. 2;
  Essex Head, Essex Street, iv. 253: See under CLUBS;
  Exeter-Change, iv. 116, n. 2;
  Exeter Street,
    Johnson's first lodgings, i. 103; iii. 405, n. 6;
    said to have written there some of the <i>Debates</i>, i. 504-5;
  Falcon Court, Fleet Street, Boswell and Johnson step aside into it,
iv. 72;
  Farrar's-Buildings, Boswell lodges there, i. 437;
  Fetter Lane,
    Johnson lodges there, iii. 405, n. 6;
    has sudden relief by a good night's rest, iii. 99, n. 4;
    Levett woos his future wife in a coal shed, i. 370, n. 3;
  Fleet-ditch, Johnson's voice seems to resound to it, ii. 262;
  Fleet Prison,
    broken open in the Gordon Riots, iii. 429;
    Endymion Porter's pun on it, v. 137, n. 4;
    Lloyd a prisoner, i. 395, n. 2;
    Oldys a prisoner, i. 175, n. 2;
    Savage lodges in its liberties, i. 125, n. 4, 416, n. 1;
  Fleet Street,
    animated appearance, ii. 337;
    compared with Tempé and Mull, iii. 302;
    Boswell meets Johnson 'moving along,' iv. 71;
    dangers, its, i. 163, n. 2;
    Goldsmith lodges in a court opening out of it, i. 350, n. 3;
    Greenwich Park not equal to it, i. 461;
    Johnson's favourite street, ii. 427; iii. 450;
    Johnson helps a gentlewoman in liquor across it, ii. 434;
    Kearsley the bookseller, i. 214, n. 1;
    Langton lodges there during Johnson's illness, iv. 266, n. 3;
    Lintott's shop at the Cross Keys, iv. 80, n. 1;
    Macaulay describes  its 'river fog and coal smoke,' iv. 350, n. 1;
    the Museum, iv. 319;
  Fox Court, Brook Street, Holborn, Savage's birthplace, i. 170, n. 5;
  Gerrard Street, Boswell's lodgings, iii. 51, n. 3;
  Goodman's Fields, Garrick's first appearance, i. 168, n. 3;
  Gough Square,
    Johnson lives there from 1749-1759 (writes the <i>Dictionary, Rambler,
Rasselas</i>, and part of the <i>Idler</i>), i. 188, 350, n. 3; iii. 405, n. 6;
    described by Carlyle, i. 188, n. 1;
    by Dr. Burney, i. 328;
  Gray's Inn,
    Johnson lodges there, i. 350, n. 3; iii. 405, n. 6;
    Osborne's bookshop, i. 161;
  Great Russell Street, Beauclerk's library, iv. 105, n. 2;
  Gresham College, iii. 13;
  Grosvenor Square, Mr. Thrale's house,
    Johnson's room in it, iii. 324, n. 4, 405, n. 6; iv. 72;
    Mr. Thrale dies there, iv. 84;
  Grub Street,
    defined, i. 296;
    saluted, ib., n. 2;
    Johnson had never been there, ib.;
    history of it, i. 307, n. 2;
    'Let us go and eat a beefsteak in Grub Street,' iv. 187;
  Guildhall,
    Beckford's monument, iii. 201;
    its Giants, v. 103, n. 1;
    Wilkes on his way to it, iv. 101, n. 2;
  Haberdashers' Company, i. 132, n. 1;
  Half-Moon Street, Boswell's lodgings, ii. 46, n. 2, 59;
  Harley Street,
    Johnson dines at Allan Ramsay's house, No. 67, iii. 391, n. 2;
  Haymarket Theatre,
    Foote and George III, iv. 13, n. 3;
    Foote's patent, iii. 97, n. 2;
    Gordon Riots,  open at the, iii. 429, n. 3;
    <i>Spectator</i>, mentioned in the, iii. 449;
  Hedge Lane, Johnson visits a man in distress, iii. 324;
  Henrietta Street, i. 485, n. 1;
  Holborn,
    Boswell starts from it in the Newcastle Fly, ii. 377, n. 1;
    Johnson  twice resides there, iii. 405, n. 6;
      writes there his <i>Hermit of Teneriffe</i>, i. 192, n. 1;
    Tyburn procession along it, iv. 189, n. 1;
  Hummums, iii. 349;
  Hyde Park,
    Boswell takes an airing in Paoli's coach, ii. 71, n. 2;
    troops reviewed  there at Dodd's execution, iii. 120, n. 3;
  Hyde Park Corner, iii. 450;
  Inner Temple: See below under TEMPLE;
  Ironmonger Row, Old Street, Psalmanazar lived there, iii. 443, 444;
  Islington,
    Johnson goes there for change of air, iv. 271, 415;
    mentioned, iii. 273, 450;
  Ivy Lane: See under CLUBS, Ivy Lane Club;
  Johnson Buildings, iii. 405, n. 6;
  Johnson's Court,
    Johnson removes to it, ii. 5;
    Boswell and Beauclerk's veneration  for it, ii. 229, 427;
    'Johnson of that <i>Ilk</i>,' ib., n. 2; iii. 405, n. 6;
  Kennington Common, iii. 239, n. 2;
  Kensington,
    Elphinston's academy, ii. 171, n. 2;
    Boswell and Johnson dine there, ii. 226;
  Kensington Palace,
    Dr. Clarke and Walpole sit up there one night, iii. 248, n. 2;
  King's Bench Prison,
    broken open in the Gordon Riots, iii. 429;
    Lydiat imprisoned, i. 194, n. 2;
    Smart dies in it, i. 306, n. 1;
    Wilkes imprisoned, iii. 46, n. 5;
  King's Bench Walk,
    Johnson hears Misella's story, i. 223, n. 2;
    'Persuasion tips his tongue,' &amp;c., ii. 339, n. 1;
  King's Head: See CLUBS, Ivy Lane;
  Knightsbridge, v. 286;
  Lambeth-marsh, Johnson said to have lain concealed there, i. 141;
  Lambeth Palace, <i>public</i> dinners, iv. 367, n. 3;
  Leicester-fields, Reynolds lived there, ii. 384, n. 3;
  Le Telier's Tavern: See above under DOVER STREET;
  Lincoln's Inn, Warburton appointed preacher, ii. 37, n. 1;
  Little Britain,
    Benjamin Franklin lodged next door to Wilcox's shop, i. 102, n. 1;
    mentioned by Swift, i. 129, n. 3;
  London Bridge, Old,
    account of it, iv. 257, n. 1;
    booksellers on it, iv. 257;
    <i>shooting</i> it, i. 458, n. 2;
  Lower Grosvenor Street, iv. 110;
  Ludgate prison, Dr. Hodges dies in it, ii. 341, n. 3;
  Magdalen House, iii. 139, n. 4;
  Mansion-House, Boswell dines there, ii. 378, n. 1;
  Marshalsea,
    broken open at the Gordon Riots, iii. 429;
    described by Wesley, i. 303, n. 1;
  Marylebone-Gardens, Johnson said to have begun a riot there, iv. 324;
  Mile-End Green, iii. 450;
  Mitre Tavern,
    Johnson's resort, i. 399;
    Boswell and Johnson's first evening there, i. 401;
    Johnson, Boswell, and Goldsmith, i. 417;
    Boswell's supper, i. 423;
    Boswell and Johnson alone on a rainy night, i. 426;
    supper on Boswell's return from abroad, ii. 8;
    supper with Temple, ii. 11;
    dinners in 1769, ii. 73, 98;
    dinner with two young Methodists, ii. 120;
    farewell dinner with Dr. Maxwell, ii. 132;
    Boswell and Johnson, dinner in 1772, ii. 157;
    Boswell loses a dinner there, ii. 178;
    Boswell and Johnson, dinner in 1773, ii. 242;
    Boswell, Johnson and a Scotchman, ii. 307;
    Johnson and young Col in 1775, ii. 411;
    Boswell, Johnson and Murray in 1776, iii. 8;
    Boswell and Johnson in 1777, 'Hermit hoar' composed, iii. 159, n. 3;
    Boswell's  mistake about, ii. 291, n. 1;
    'the custom of the Mitre' kept up, iii. 341;
    'we will go again to the Mitre,' iv. 71;
    Cole, the landlord, v. 139;
    Johnson and Murphy dine there, i. 375, n. 1;
  Moorfields, John Hoole born there, iv. 187;
  mad-houses, ii. 251; iv. 208;
  mass-house burnt at the Gordon Riots, iii. 429;
  New Street, Fetter Lane, Strahan's printing office, ii. 323, n. 2;
iv. 371;
  New Street, Strand, Johnson dined at the Pine Apple, i. 103;
  Newgate,
    Akerman the keeper, iii. 431-433;
      profits of his office, iii. 431, n. 1;
    Baretti imprisoned, ii. 97, n. 1;
    burnt in the Gordon Riots, iii. 429;
    Cooley imprisoned, i. 503;
    Dodd, Dr., iii. 166;
    executions removed there, iv. 188, n. 2, 328;
    Hawkins's story of a man sentenced to death, iii. 166, n. 3;
    Moore, Rev. Mr., the Ordinary, iv. 329, n. 3;
    Villette, Rev. Mr., the Ordinary: See VILLETTE;
    Wesley's description of its horrors, iii. 431, n. 1;
      improvement, ib.;
  Newgate Street, iv. 204;
  Northumberland-House, Dr. Percy's apartment burnt, iii. 420, n. 5;
    next shop to it a pickle-shop, ii. 218;
  Old Bailey,
    Baretti's trial, ii. 96;
    Bet Flint's trial, iv. 103;
    Savage's, i. 162, n. 3;
    Sessions House plundered in the Gordon Riots, iii. 429;
    Sessions in 1784, iv. 328, n. 1 (see <i>Old Bailey Sessions Paper</i>);
  Old Bond Street, Boswell's lodgings, ii. 82;
  Old Devil Tavern, iv. 254, n. 4;
  Old Jewry, Dr. Foster's Chapel, iv. 9, n. 5;
  Old Street, Johnson attends a club there, iii. 443; iv. 187;
  Old Swan, Boswell and Johnson land there, i. 458;
  Opera House, Boswell at the performance of <i>Medea</i>, iii. 91, n. 2;
  Oxford Street, The Pantheon, ii. 168-9;
  Pall Mall, Dodsley's shop, i. 135, n. 1;
  Pall Mall, King's Head, The World Club, iv. 102, n. 4;
  Park Lane, Warren Hastings's house, iv. 66;
  Parsloe's Tavern: See ST. JAMES STREET;
  Paternoster Row, Cooper the bookseller, v. 117, n. 4;
  Piccadilly,
    Boswell's lodgings, ii. 219;
    Walpole describes a procession, iv. 296, n. 3;
  Poultry, No. 22, Messieurs Dilly's house: See under DILLY, Messieurs;
  Prince's Tavern: See SACKVILLE STREET;
  Printing House Square, ii. 323, n. 2;
  Pye Street, iv. 371;
  Queen Square, Bloomsbury, Dr. John Campbell's house, i. 418, n. 4;
  Ranelagh,
    barristers should not go too often, iv. 310;
    <i>Evelina</i>, described in, ii. 169, n. 1;
    'girl, a Ranelagh,' iii. 199, n. 1;
    Gordon Riots, open at the, iii. 429, n. 3;
    <i>Highland Laddie</i>, sung there, v. 184, n. 1;
    Johnson's admiration of it, ii. 168;
      his first visit, iii. 199;
      often went, ii. 119;
    riot of footmen, ii. 78, n. 1;
    Thornton's <i>Ode on St. Cecilia's Day</i> performed there, i. 420, n. 2;
  Ranelagh House, ii. 31, n. 1;
  Red Lion Street, v. 196, n. 2;
  Rotherhithe, iii. 21, n. 1;
  Round-house,
    Garrick 'will have to bail Johnson out of it,' i. 249;
    Captain Booth taken to it, ib., n. 2;
    Johnson carried to it, ii. 299;
  Royal Exchange, Jack Ellis, the scrivener, iii. 21;
  Russell Street, Covent Garden, No. 8,
    Tom Davies's house, where Boswell first saw Johnson, i. 390;
  Sackville Street, Prince's Tavern,
    The Literary Club met there, i. 479; v. 109, n. 5;
  Slaughter's Coffee-house, i. 115, n. 1; iv. 15;
  Smithfield,
    boxing-ring, iv. 111, n. 3; v. 229, n. 2;
    joustes held there, iv. 268, n. 2;
  Snow-hill, Mrs. Gardiner's shop, i. 242; iii. 22; iv. 246;
  Soho-Square, house of the Venetian Resident, i. 274;
  Somerset Coffee-house, Strand,
    Boswell and Johnson start from it for Oxford, ii. 438;
  Somerset-House, built by Sir W. Chambers, iv. 187, n. 4;
  Somerset Place, Exhibition of the Royal Academy, iv. 202;
  South Audley Street, General Paoli's house, iii. 391-2;
  Southampton-Buildings, Chancery-Lane,
    Burke and Johnson in consultation there, iv. 324;
  Southwark Elections: See THRALE, Henry, Southwark;
    kennels running with blood, v. 247;
    Thrale's house, ii. 286, n. 1, 427;
    Johnson's apartment in it, i. 493; iii. 405, n. 6;
  Spring Garden, afterwards Vauxhall, iv. 26;
  St. Andrew's, Holborn, i. 170;
  St. Clement Danes,
    Boswell and Johnson attend service there, ii. 214, 356, 357;
iii. 17, 24, 26, 302, 313; iv. 90, 203, 209;
    hear a sermon on evil-speaking, iii. 379;
    Johnson's seat, ii. 214;
      returns thanks after recovery, iv. 270, n. 1;
  St. George's-Fields,
    meeting place of the 'Protestants' at the Gordon Riots, iii. 428;
  St. George's, Hanover Square,
    Dodd tries to get the living by a bribe, iii. 139, n. 3;
    Thomas Newton resigns the lectureship, iv. 286, n. 1;
  St. James's Palace, Lord Mayor Beckford's address, iii. 201, n. 3;
  St. James's Square, Johnson and Savage walk round it, i. 163, n. 2, 164;
  St. James's Street,
    a new gaming club, iii. 23, n. 1;
    Parsloe's Tavern, The Literary Club meet there, i. 479;
    Wirgman's, the toy-shop, iii. 325;
  St. John's Gate, Clerkenwell,
    indecent books sold there by Cave, i. 112, n. 2;
    Johnson's reverence for it, i. 111;
    his room, i. 504;
    meets Boyse there, iv. 407, n. 4;
    Savage's visits, i. 162;
    mentioned, i. 123, n. 3, 135, n. 1, 151;
  St. Luke's Hospital, iv. 208;
  St. Martin's in the Fields, i. 135;
  St. Martin's Street, Dr. Burney occupies Newton's house, iv. 134;
  St. Paul's Cathedral,
    Boswell's Easter 'going up ': See under BOSWELL, St. Paul's;
    described by an Indian king in the <i>Spectator</i>, i. 450, n. 3;
    Johnson's monument, iv. 423-4, 444-6;
    monuments, proposal to raise, ii. 239; iv. 423;
    mentioned, iii. 349;
  St. Paul's Churchyard,
    Innys the bookseller, iv. 402, n. 2, 440;
    Johnson's old club dines at the Queen's Arms, iv. 87, 435;
    Rivington's book-shop, i. 135, n. 1;
  St. Sepulchre's Churchyard, the bellman on the wall, iv. 189, n. 1;
  St. Sepulchre's Ladies' charity-school, iv. 246;
  Staple Inn,
    Isaac Reed's Chambers, i. 169, n. 2; iv. 37;
    Johnson's chambers, i. 350, n. 3, 516; iii. 405, n. 6;
    <i>Rasselas</i> not written there, iii. 405, n. 6;
  Stepney, Mead's chapel, iii. 355, n. 2;
  Strand,
    Boswell and Johnson walk along it one night, i. 457;
    dangers of it, i. 163, n. 1;
    Johnson lodges in it, iii. 405, n. 6;
    mentioned, iv. 144:
    See under SOMERSET COFFEE HOUSE and TURK'S HEAD COFFEE HOUSE;
  Temple,
    Chambers's, Sir Robert, chambers in, ii. 260;
    Goldsmith's, ii. 97, n. 1; iv. 27;
    Johnson's, i. 250; iv. 134;
    Johnson's walk, i. 463;
    Scott's chambers, iii. 262;
    Steevens's, iv. 324;
  Temple Bar,
    Goldsmith's whisper about the heads on it, ii. 238;
    heads first placed on it in William III's time, iii. 408, n. 3;
    Johnson's voice seems to resound from it to Fleet-ditch, ii. 262;
    mentioned, ii. 155; iv. 92, n. 5;
  Temple Church,
    Johnson attends the service, ii. 130;
    Dr. Maxwell assistant preacher, ii. 116;
  Temple-gate, ii. 262;
  Inner Temple, Boswell enters at it, ii. 377, n. 1;
    rent of his chambers there, iii. 179, n. 1;
  Middle Temple, Burke enters there, v. 34, n. 3;
  Middle Temple Gate, Lintott's bookshop, iv. 80, n. 1;
  Temple Stairs,
    Boswell and Johnson take a sculler there, i. 457;
      land there, ii. 434;
  Temple Lane, Inner,
    Boswell lodges at the bottom of it, i. 437;
    Johnson's chambers, iii. 405, n. 6;
      described by Fitzherbert, i. 350, n. 3;
      by Murphy, i. 375, n. 1;
      Boswell pays his first visit to Johnson, i. 395;
      Mme. de Boufflers visits him, ii. 405;
  Thames; See THAMES;
  Tom's Coffee-house, iii. 33;
  Tower,
    Earl of Essex's <i>Roman death</i> in it, v. 403, n, 2;
    mentioned, i. 163, n. 2;
  Tower Hill, Lord Kilmarnock beheaded, v. 105;
    Lord Lovat, v. 234;
  Turk's Head Coffee-house, Strand,
    Boswell and Johnson sup there, i. 445, 452, 462, 464;
      talk of visiting the Hebrides, i. 450; ii. 291, n. 1;
  Turk's Head, Gerrard Street,
    Literary Club meet there, i. 478; ii. 330, n. 1; v. 109, n. 5;
  Vauxhall Gardens, iii. 308; iv. 26, n. 1;
  Wapping, Boswell and Windham <i>explore</i> it, iv. 201;
  Warwick Lane, i. 165, n. 1, 175, n. 3;
  Water Lane, Goldsmith's tailor, ii. 83;
  Westminster,
    election of 1741, iv. 198, n. 3;
    election of 1784, iv. 266, 279, n. 2;
    scrutiny, iv. 297, n. 2;
  Westminster Abbey:
    Cloisters and Dean's-Yard, Dr. Taylor's house, i. 238; iii. 222;
    Goldsmith and Johnson survey Poets' Corner, ii. 238;
    Goldsmith's monument, iii. 81-5;
    Johnson's funeral, iv. 419;
    Reynolds on the overcrowding of the monuments, iv. 423, n. 2:
    See under STANLEY, Dean, <i>Memorials of Westminster Abbey</i>;
  Westminster Hall, iv. 309; v. 57: See under LAWYERS;
  Westminster Police Court,
    Henry Fielding the magistrate, iii. 217, n. 2;
    Johnson attends it, iii. 216; iv. 184;
  Westminster School,
    Beckford a pupil, iii. 76, n. 2;
    Boswell's son James a pupil, iii. 12;
    bullying, ib., n. 3;
    group of remarkable boys, i. 395, n. 2;
    Lewis, an usher, iv. 307;
  Will's Coffee-house, Dryden's summer and winter chairs, iii. 71;
iv. 91, n. 1;
  Wine Office Court, Fleet Street, Goldsmith's lodgings, i. 366, n. 1;
  Wood Street Compter, broken open, iii. 429;
  Woodstock Street, Hanover Square, Johnson lodges there, i. 111;
iii. 405, n. 6.
<i>London, a Poem</i>,
  account of its publication, i. 118-31;
    correspondence with Cave, i. 120-4;
    price paid for it, i. 124, 193, n. 1;
    published by Dodsley, i. 123-4;
      in May, 1738, i. 118;
      the same day as Pope's '1738,' i. 126;
    second edition, i. 127;
    sold at a shilling a copy, ib., n. 3;
  Attorneys attacked, ii. 126, n. 4;
  Boileau's and Oldham's imitations of the same satire, i. 118-20;
  Boswell quotes it at Greenwich, i. 460;
  composed rapidly, i. 125, n. 4;
  extracts from it, i. 130;
  Oxford, effect produced by it at, i. 127;
  Pope's opinion of it, i. 129, 143;
  quoted, i. 77, n. 1, n. 3;
  rhymes, imperfect, i. 129;
  <i>Thales</i> and Savage, i. 125, n. 4.
<i>London Chronicle</i>,
  Goldsmith's 'apology' published in it, ii. 209;
  Johnson writes the <i>Introduction</i>, i. 317;
    takes it in, i. 318; ii. 103;
  printed by Strahan, iii. 221;
  mentioned, i. 251, 327, 481; ii. 412.
<i>London Evening Debates</i>, iii. 460.
<i>London Magazine</i>,
  Boswell's <i>Hypochondriacks</i> published in it, iv. 179, n. 5;
  debates in Parliament, i. 502;
  Wesley attacks it, v. 35, n. 3.
<i>London Packet</i>, ii. 209, n. 2.
LONDONERS, ii. 101; iv. 210.
LONG, Dudley (afterwards North), iv. 75, 81, 83.
LONGINUS, i. 3, n. 1.
LONGITUDE,
  ascertaining the, i. 267, n. 1, 274, n. 2; ii. 67, n. 1;
  parliamentary reward, i. 301;
  Swift and Goldsmith refer to it, i. 301, n. 3.
LONGLANDS, Mr., a solicitor, ii. 186.
LONGLEY, Archbishop, iv. 8, n. 3.
LONGLEY, John, Recorder of Rochester, iv. 8.
LONGMAN, Messieurs, i. 183, 290, n. 2.
LONSDALE, first Earl of
  brutality to Boswell, ii. 179, n. 3;
  courted by him, i. 5, n. 2; v. 113, n. 1;
  a cruel tyrant, v. 113, n. 1.
'LOPLOLLY,' i. 378, n. 1.
LORD, valuing a man for being one, iii. 347.
LORD, Scotch, celebrated for drinking, iii. 170, 329.
LORD C., abbreviation for Lord Chamberlain, iii. 34, n. 4.
LORD ——, no mind of his own, iv. 29.
LORD ——, who carried politeness to an excess, iv. 17.
LORD'S DAY BILL OF 1781, iv. 92, n. 5.
LORD'S PRAYER, The, v. 121.
LORDS, few cheat, iii. 353.
LORDS, great, and great ladies, iv. 116.
LORDS, House of. See DEBATES OF PARLIAMENT.
LORDS, ignorance in ancient times, iv. 217.
LORDS, quoting the authority of, iv. 183.
LORT, Rev. Dr., iv. 0 [Transcriber's note: sic], n. 4.
LOUDOUN, Countess of, iii. 366; v. 371.
LOUDOUN, Earl of, iii. 118; v. 178, n. 3;
  'jumps for joy,' v. 371;
  character by Boswell, v. 372;
  by Franklin, ib., n. 3.
LOUGHBOROUGH, Lord (Alexander Wedderburne, afterwards Earl of Rosslyn),
  Bute's errand-goer, ii. 354;
  career, i. 387;
  cold affectation of consequence, iv. 179, n. 1;
  Dunning, afraid of, iii. 240, n. 3;
  Foote, associates with, i. 504; ii. 374;
  Gibbon, congratulated by, iii. 241, n. 2;
  Johnson's pension, i. 373-5; 376, 380;
  oratory, i. 387;
  pronunciation, i. 386;
  taught by Sheridan, ib.; iii. 2;
    and by Macklin, ib.;
  solicited employment, ii. 430, n. 2;
  Taylor's, Dr., law-suit, iii. 44;
  mentioned, ii. 152, n. 2.
LOUGHBOROUGH, the town, iii. 2.
LOUIS, Brother, the Moravian, iii. 122, n. 1.
LOUIS PHILIPPE, ii. 391, n. 6.
LOVAGE, ii. 361.
LOVAT, Master of, iii. 399, n. 3.
LOVAT, Simon, Lord,
  a boast of his, v. 397;
  helped to carry off Lady Grange, v. 227, n. 4;
  <i>Lines on his Execution</i>, i. 180;
  monument to his father, v. 234;
  trial and execution, i. 181, n. 1; i. 501.
LOVAT, Thomas, Lord, v. 234.
LOVE,
  effects exaggerated, ii. 122;
  romantic fancy that a man can be in love but once, ii. 460.
LOVE, James, an actor, ii. 159.
<i>Love and Madness</i>, iv. 187.
<i>Love in a Hollow Tree</i>, iv. 80.
LOVEDAY, John, ii. 258, n. 3.
LOVEDAY, Dr. John, ii. 258, n. 3.
LOVELACE, in <i>Clarissa</i>, ii. 341.
LOVIBOND, Edward, i. 101.
LOW COMPANY, iv. 312.
LOW DUTCH,
  Johnson studies, ii. 263; iv. 21;
  resemblance to English, in. 235; iv. 22.
LOW LIFE, v. 307.
LOWE, Canon, i. 45, 48.
LOWE, Charles, <i>Life of Prince Bismarck</i>, iv. 27, n. 1
LOWE, Mauritius,
  account of him, iv. 202, n. 1;
  house in Hedge Lane, iii. 324, n. 2;
  Johnson's bequest to his children, iv. 402, n. 2;
  picture refused by the Academy, iv. 201-3;
  subscription for his daughters, iv. 202, n. 1;
  sups with Johnson, iii. 380;
  visits him, iv. 209-10.
LOWNDES, W. T.,
  <i>Bibl. Man</i>. error about <i>The World newspaper</i>, iii. 16, n. 1.
LOWTH, Robert, Bishop of London,
  <i>English Grammar</i>, iv. 311;
  <i>Prelections</i>, v. 57, n. 3;
  rose by his learning, v. 81;
  Warburton, controversy with, ii. 37; v. 125, 423.
LOWTH, William, iii. 58.
LOWTHER FAMILY, v. 113.
LOWTHER, Sir James, a rich miser, v. 112.
LOYALTY OF THE NATION, ii. 370;
  blasted for a time, iv. 171, n. 1.
LOYOLA, Ignatius, i. 77.
LUARD, Rev. Dr., iii. 83, n. 3.
<i>Lucan</i>, quoted, i. 320, n. 4.
LUCAN, first Earl of,
  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;
  Johnson intimate with him and Lady Lucan, iii. 425; iv. i, n. 1, 326;
  anecdote of Johnson as Thrale's executor, iv. 86.
LUCAS, Dr. Charles,
  Johnson writes in his defence, i. 311;
  reviews his <i>Essay on Waters</i>, i. 91, n. 1, 309, 311.
LUCAS, Richard, Enquiry after Happiness, v. 294.
LUCAS DE LINDA, ii. 82.
<i>Lucian</i>, iii. 238, n. 2;
  Combabus, story of, iii. 238, n. 2;
  Epicurean and the Stoick, pleadings of the, iii. 10;
  Francklin's translation, iv. 34.
<i>Lucius Florus</i>, ii. 237.
<i>Lucretius</i>,
  quoted, i. 283; iv. 390, n. 3, 425, n. 4;
  Tasso borrows a simile from him, iii. 330.
<i>Luctus</i>, ii. 371.
LUKE, in <i>The Traveller</i>, ii. 6.
LUMISDEN, Andrew, ii. 401, n. 2; v. 194.
LUMM, Sir Francis, ii. 34, n. 1.
LUNARDI, 'the flying man in the balloon,' iv. 357, n. 3, 358, n. 1.
<i>Lusiad, The</i>, Johnson's projected translation, iv. 251.
  See under MICKLE.
LUTHER, Martin, v. 217.
LUTON, iv. 128.
LUTON HOE, iv. 118, 127.
LUTTEREL, Colonel, ii. 111.
LUXURY,
  dread of it visionary, ii. 169-170;
  money better spent on it than in almsgiving, iii. 56, 291;
  no nation ever hurt by it, ii. 217-9;
  produces much good, iii. 55;
  querulous declamations against it, iii. 226;
  every society as luxurious as it can be, iii. 282;
  man not diminished in size by it, v. 358;
  reaches very few, ii. 218;
  Wesley attacks its apologists, iii. 56, n. 2.
<i>Lyce, To</i>, i. 178.
LYDIA, v. 220.
LYDIAT, Thomas, i. 194, n. 2; ii. 7.
LYE, Edward, ii. 17.
LYNNE REGIS, i. 141, 285.
LYONS, iii. 446.
LYSONS ——, of Clifford's Inn, iv. 402, n. 2.
LYTTELTON, George, first Lord,
  Boothby, Miss, admired, iv. 57, n. 2;
  Boswell's <i>Corsica</i>, praises, ii. 46, n. 1;
  caricature, lines on him in a, v. 285, n. 1;
  character by Chesterfield and Walpole, i. 267, n. 2;
  Chesterfield, Cibber, and Johnson, anecdote of, i. 256;
  Critical Reviewers, thanks the, iv. 57, 58, n. 1;
  <i>Debates</i>, speech in the, ii. 61, n. 4;
  epitaph on Sir J. Macdonald, v. 151;
  <i>Dialogues of the Dead</i>, ii. 126, 447; iv. 57;
  Goldsmith's <i>History of England</i>,
    supposed to have written, i. 412, n. 2;
  <i>History of Henry II</i>, Johnson criticises it to the King, ii. 38;
    thirty years spent on it, iii. 32;
    punctuation, ib.;
    kept back for fear of Smollett, iii. 33;
    its whiggism, ii. 221;
  Hume's Scotticisms, ii. 72, n. 2;
  Johnson, <i>Life</i> by, iv. 57-8;
    attacks on it, iv. 64;
  Johnson's  unfriendliness, iv. 57;
  Montague, Mrs., friendship with, iv. 64;
  <i>Persian Letters</i>, i-74, n. 2;
  'respectable Hottentot,' i. 267, n. 2;
  Smollett, attacked by, iii. 33, n. 1;
  Thomson's 'loathing to write,' iii. 360;
  mentioned, ii. 64, n. 2, 124, n. 1.
LYTTELTON, Thomas, second Lord,
  character, his, iv. 298, n. 3;
  timidity, v. 454;
  vision, iv. 298;
  mentioned, iv. 296, n. 3.
LYTTELTON, Sir Edward, v. 457.</p>

<h3>M.</h3>

<p>MACALLAN, Eupham (Euphan M'Cullan), v. 39.
MACARTNEY, Earl of,
  Boswell's Life of Johnson, praises, i. 13;
  Campbell, Dr. John, account of, i. 418, n. 1 iii. 343, n. 4;
  embassy to China, i. 13, n. 2, 367, n. 2;
  Hindoos, describes a peculiarity of the, iv. 12, n. 2;
  Johnson and Lady Craven, anecdote, iii. 22, n. 2;
  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;
  mentioned, i. 380; iii. 238, n. 2, 425.
MACAULAY, Dr., a physician,
  husband of Mrs. Macaulay the historian, i. 242, n. 4; iii. 402.
MACAULAY, Mrs. Catherine, the historian,
  Boswell wishes to pit her  against Johnson, iii. 185;
  Johnson and her footman, i. 447; iii. 77;
    had not read her <i>History</i>, iii. 46, n. 2;
    'match' with her, ii. 336;
    political and moral principles, wonders at, ii. 219;
    toast, i. 487;
  maiden name and marriage, i. 242, n. 4;
  'reddening her cheeks,' iii. 46;
  ridiculous, making her, ii. 336;
  Shakespeare's plays and her daughter, i. 447, n. 1;
    mentioned, ii. 46, n. 1.
MACAULAY, Dr. James,
  <i>Bibliography of Rasselas</i>, ii. 208, n. 3.
MACAULAY, Rev. John,
  Lord Macaulay's grandfather, v. 355, n. 1, 360, n. 1;
  a man of good sense, v. 360;
  on principles and practice, v. 359.
MACAULAY, Rev. Kenneth (Lord Macaulay's great-uncle),
  colds caught at St. Kilda, on, ii. 51, 150; v. 278;
  <i>History of St. Kilda</i>, ii. 150;
  Johnson visits him, v. 118;
    disbelieves his having written the <i>History</i>, v. 119;
    calls him 'a bigot to laxness,' v. 120;
    praises his magnanimity, ii. 51, 150; v. 278.
MACAULAY, Mrs. Kenneth,
  Johnson offers to get a servitorship for her son, ii, 380; v. 122;
  mentioned, v. 119.
MACAULAY, Thomas Babington (Lord Macaulay),
  ancestors, ii. 51, n. 2; v. 118, n. 1, 355, n. 1;
  <i>Addison, Essay on</i>, iv. 53, n. 3;
  <i>anfractuosity</i>, iv. 4, n. 1;
  Bentley and Boyle, v. 238, n. 1;
  'brilliant flashes of silence,' v. 360, n. 1;
  Boswell as a biographer, i. 30, n. 3;
  Burke's first speech, ii. 16, n. 2;
  Campbell's, Dr., <i>Diary</i>, ii. 338, n. 2;
  Chesterfield, Earl of, eminence of the, ii. 329, n. 3;
  Crisp, Mr., account of, iv. 239, n. 3;
  Croker's 'blunders,' ii. 338, n. 2;
    criticism on <i>Ad Lauram Epigramma</i>, i. 157, n. 5;
    Greek, v. 234, n. 1;
    Latin, iv. 144, n. 2;
    and the Marquis of Montrose, v. 298, n. 1;
    and <i>Prince Titi</i>, ii. 391, n. 4;
  feeling and dining, on, ii. 94, n. 2;
  Gibbon's reported Mahometanism, ii. 448, n. 2;
  Hastings's answer to Johnson's letter, iv. 70, n. 2;
  Hastings and the study of Persian, iv. 68, n. 2;
  House of Ormond, i. 281, n. 1;
  imagination, described, iii. 455;
  Johnson's blank verse, iv. 42, n. 7;
    and Boswell on the non-jurors, iv. 286, n. 3, 287, n. 2;
    <i>called</i>, iv. 94, n. 4;
    and <i>Cecilia</i>, iv. 223, n. 5, 389, n. 4;
    contempt of histories, iv. 312, n. 1;
    etymologies, i. 186, n. 5;
    and Horne Tooke, i. 297, n. 2;
    household, i. 232;
    ill-fed roast mutton, iv. 284, n. 4;
    knowledge of the science of human nature, iii. 450;
      of London and the country, ib.;
    talk and style of writing, iv. 237, n. 1; v. 145, n. 2;
    translation of his own sayings, iv. 320, n. 2;
    on travelling, Appendix B, iii. 449-59;
  <i>King's evil</i>, i. 42, n. 3;
  Literary Club, i. 477, n. 4;
  Mattaire's use of <i>Carteret</i> as a dactyl, iv. 3;
  Pitt's peerages, iv. 249, n. 4;
    treatment of Johnson and Gibbon, iv. 350, n. 1;
  Prendergrass, ii. 183, n. 1;
  Richardson's novels, ii. 174, n. 2;
  Thrale's, Mrs., second marriage, iii. 49, n. 1;
  Warburton, the, of our age, ii. 36, n. 2;
  William III and Dodwell, v. 437, n. 3;
  window tax, v. 301, n. 1.
MACAULEY, Dr. (Cock Lane Ghost), (probably Dr. Macaulay, the husband
of Mrs. Macaulay the historian), i. 407, n. 3.
MACBEAN, Alexander, Johnson's amanuensis, account of him, i. 187;
  <i>calling</i>, on, iv. 94;
  Charterhouse, brother of the, i. 187; iii. 440-1;
  death, iii. 44l, n. 3;
  stood as a screen between Johnson and death, ib.;
  Johnson's <i>Preface</i> to his <i>Geography</i>, i. 187; ii. 204;
  learning, a man of great, iii. 106;
  starving, ii. 379, n. 1;
  mentioned, i. 138, 139; iii. 25.
MACBEAN, the younger, i. 187.
<i>Macbeth, Miscellaneous Observations on</i>, i. 175.
  For <i>Macbeth</i>, See under SHAKESPEARE.
<i>Maccabees</i>, Johnson looks into the, ii. 189, n. 3.
<i>Maccaroni</i>, a, v. 84.
MACCARONIC verses, iii. 283.
MACCLESFIELD, v. 432.
MACCLESFIELD, Charles Gerard, Earl of, Bill of Divorce, i. 170, n. 5.
MACCLESFIELD, Countess of, account of her, i. 174, n. 2;
  divorced, i. 170;
  marries Colonel Brett, i. 174, n. 2;
  Savage's reputed mother, i. 166, n. 4;
  evidence of his story examined, i. 170-4;
  reproached at Bath, i. 174, n. 1.
MACCLESFIELD, Thomas Parker, first Earl of, i. 157.
MACCLESFIELD, George Parker, second Earl of, i. 267, n. 1.
MACCONOCHIE—, a Scotch advocate, iii. 213.
MACCRUSLICK, v. 166, n. 2.
MACDONALD, Clan of, ii. 269, 270.
MACDONALD, Sir Alexander, of Slate
  (father of Sir James and Sir Alexander Macdonald), v. 174, 188, 260.
MACDONALD, Sir Alexander, first Lord Macdonald,
  arms rusty, his, v. 151, 355;
  Boswell and Johnson try to rouse him, v. 150-1;
  feudal system, attacks the, ii. 177;
  flees from his tenants, v. 150, n. 3;
  Johnson, introduced to, ii. 157;
    invites him to visit him, v. 14;
    inhospitality, ii. 303, n. 1; v. 148, n. 1, 157, n. 2;
    'a very penurious gentleman,' v. 277, 279;
    anecdotes of his penuriousness, v. 315-6;
    passages suppressed by Boswell, v. 148, n. 1, 415, n. 4;
  landlord, an oppressive, v. 149, 161;
  Latin verses, his bad, v. 419;
  sugar-tongs in his house, absence of, v. 22, n. 1;
  mentioned, ii. 169, n. 2, 173, 191, n. 2; v. 275.
MACDONALD, Lady,
  wife of the first Lord Macdonald, ii. 169, n. 2; v. 147.
MACDONALD, Alexander, of Kingsburgh (old Kingsburgh),
  his annuity, v. 257-8;
  helps the Pretender, v. 188-9;
  examined, v. 259-60;
  mentioned, v. 160-1.
MACDONALD of Kingsburgh, the younger, account of him, v. 184;
  emigrates, v. 185;
  mentioned, v. 205-6.
MACDONALD, old Mrs. of Kingsburgh, v. 190.
MACDONALD, Archibald, M.P., v. 153, n. 1.
MACDONALD of Clanranold, v. 158.
MACDONALD, Sir Donald, v. 147.
MACDONALD, Donald, v. 149.
MACDONALD, Donald (Donald Roy), v. 190-1.
MACDONALD, Flora, wife of Macdonald of Kingsburgh,
  Account of her adventures, v. 187-191, 201, 259;
  Courtenay's <i>Poetical Review</i>,
    mentioned in, ii. 268;
  emigrates, v. 185, n. 3;
    courage on board ship, ib.;
  health drunk on Jan. 30, iii. 371;
  Johnson visits her, v. 179, 184;
  Primrose, Lady, rewards her, v. 201, n. 3;
  virulent Jacobite in her old age, v. 185, n. 4.
MACDONALD, Hugh, v. 279.
MACDONALD, Sir James, account of him, i. 449;
  death, v. 153, n. 1;
  deeply regretted, v. 149;
  English education, v. 149;
  epitaph, v. 151;
  generosity, v. 258;
  Johnson, terror of, i. 449;
  letters to his mother, v. 153, n. 1;
  Marcellus of Scotland, iv. 82, n. 1; v. 152, n. 1;
  Rasay has his sword, v. 174;
  mentioned, v. 183, 289.
MACDONALD, James, a factor, Johnson visits him, v. 275-79.
MACDONALD, James, of Knockow, v. 257.
MACDONALD, Lady Margaret, widow of Sir A. Macdonald of Slate,
  adored in Sky, iii. 383; v. 260;
  befriends the Pretender, v. 188;
  raises a monument to her son, v. 153.
MACDONALD, Ranald, ii. 309.
MACDONALD of Scothouse, v. 197.
MACDONALD of Sky, league with Rasay, v. 174.
MACFARLANE, THE LAIRD OF, the antiquary, v. 156, n. 3.
MACFRIAR, Donald, v. 191-2.
M'GHIE, Dr. William, i. 191, n. 5.
M'GINNISES, The, v. 337.
MACKENZIE,—, of Applecross, v. 194.
MACKENZIE, Sir George, <i>Characteres Advocatorum</i>, v. 212-4;
  Dryden describes him as 'that noble wit of Scotland', iv. 38, n. 1.
MACKENZIE, Henry, <i>Man of Feeling</i>, i. 360;
  <i>Man of the World</i>, i. 360, n. 2; v. 277;
  <i>Mirror, The</i>, iv. 390, n. 1;
  Poker Club, ii. 431, n. 1;
  Wedderburne's Club, iv. 179, n. 1;
  mentioned, ii. 35, n, 1.
MACKENZIE, John, v. 191-3.
MACKENZIE,—, stories of second sight, v. 160.
MACKINNON, of Corrichatachin, v. 156;
  Boswell calls him <i>Corri</i>, v. 258;
  Johnson visits him, v. 156-162, 257-265.
MACKINNON, John, v. 197-8.
MACKINNON, Lady, v. 198.
MACKINNON, Laird of, v. 165, 195, 197-9.
MACKINNON, Mrs., v. 160-1, 259, 264.
MACKINTOSH, Sir James, Aberdeen, his fellow-students at, v. 85, n. 2;
  study of Greek there, v. 92, n. 1;
  birth-place, v. 132, n. 1;
  Burke on Boswell's <i>Life</i> as a monument to Johnson's fame, i. 10, n. 1;
    and Gibbon, ii. 348, n. 1;
    on Johnson's talk, iv. 316, n. 1;
    as a metaphysician, i. 472, n. 2;
  Dunbar, Dr., iii. 436, n. 1;
  Fox's character, iv. 167, n. 1;
    election to the Literary Club, ii. 274, n. 4;
  Gray's and Walpole's style, iii. 31, n. 1;
  Johnson, groundless charge against, v. 332, n. 1;
    idea of a ship, v. 137, n. 4;
    withheld from metaphysics, v. 109, n. 3;
  leading life over again, on, iv. 303, n. 1;
  Macdonald, Sir James, v. 152, n. 1;
  Priestley, Dr., iv. 443;
  Temple's style, iii. 257, n. 3;
  torture, late use of, i. 467, n. 1;
  mentioned, iii. 40, n. 3; 230, n. 5.
MACKLIN, Charles, <i>Life</i> by W. Cooke, iv. 437;
  <i>Man of the World</i>, v. 277, n. 1;
  taught Wedderburne, iii. 2.
MACLAURIN, Professor Colin,
  epitaphs, his, v. 49-50;
  Goldsmith's anecdote of his yawning, iii. 15;
  tries to fortify Edinburgh, v. 49, n. 6.
MACLAURIN, John (afterwards Lord Dreghorn),
  argument for Knight, a negro, iii. 86;
  motto for it from Virgil, iii. 87, n. 3, 212;
  plea read by Johnson, iii. 88, 101, 127, 212;
  epitaphs on his father, his, v. 49;
  Goldsmith's story of his father, uneasy at, iii. 15;
  Johnson, introduced to, v. 48;
    style, caricatures, ii. 363;
  'made dish,' his, i. 469; v. 394, n. 1.
MACLEAN, Alexander, Laird of Col. See COL, the old Laird of.
MACLEAN, Dr. Alexander, a physician of Tobermorie,
  Johnson visits him, v. 313-16;
  wrote <i>The History of the Macleans</i>, v. 313;
  mentioned, v. 310, 319.
MACLEAN, Dr. Alexander, another physician of Mull, v. 340.
MACLEAN, Sir Allan, Chief of the Macleans, v. 310;
  Johnson visits him, v. 322-31;
  his house, v. 322, n. 1, 323;
  Sunday evening, v. 325;
  accompanies Johnson, v. 331-44;
  in Iona, v. 335;
  asserts the rights of a chieftain, v. 337;
  brags of Scotland, v. 340;
  visits Lochbury, v. 341-3;
  lawsuit, his, ii. 380, n. 4; iii. 95, 101, 102, 122, 126-7;
  hates writers to the signet, v. 343, n. 3.
MACLEAN, Captain Lauchlan, v. 284-285, 294, 305.
MACLEAN, Clan of, ii. 269.
MACLEANS of Col, story of the, v. 297, n. 1.
MACLEAN, Donald, young Laird of Col. See COL, Laird of.
MACLEAN, Donald, of Col, father of the old laird, v. 299.
MACLEAN of Corneck, v. 293, 294, 296, 301.
MACLEAN, Sir Hector, v. 299, 323.
MACLEAN, Rev. Hector, v. 286-8, 306.
MACLEAN, Sir John, v. 314.
MACLEAN, John, a bard, v. 314.
MACLEAN of Lochbuy. See LOCHBUY, Laird of.
MACLEAN, Miss, of Inchkenneth, v. 325.
MACLEAN, Miss, of Tobermorie, v. 314, 3I7.
MACLEAN of Muck, v. 225.
MACLEAN, nephew to Maclean of Muck, v. 225.
MACLEAN of Torloisk, ii. 308.
<i>Macleans, History of the</i>, v. 313.
MACLEOD of Bay, v. 208.
MACLEOD, Captain, of Balmenoch, v. 144.
MACLEOD, Clan of,
  two branches, v. 410;
  question as to the chieftainship, ib., v. 412.
MACLEOD, Colonel, of Talisker,
  account of him, v. 256, 260;
  Johnson visits him, v. 250-56;
  mentioned, v. 95, 165, l79, 2l5, 22l, 234.
MACLEOD, Dr., of Rasay,
  wounded at Culloden, v. 190, 194;
  receives a present from the Pretender, v. 195;
  mentioned, v. 165, 169, 183, 192, 411.
MACLEOD, Donald (late of Canna), v. 156, 260, 272.
MACLEOD of Ferneley, v. 250.
MACLEOD, Flora, of Rasay,
  her beauty, v. 178;
  married, iii. 118, 122;
  visits Boswell, v. 411.
MACLEOD of Hamer, v. 225.
MACLEOD, John <i>Breck</i>, v. 233-4.
MACLEOD, John, of Rasay. See Rasay.
MACLEOD, Laird of,
  account of him, v. 176;
  as a chief, v. 208, 211, 215, 250;
  estates, v. 231;
  fisheries, v. 249;
  Johnson visits him, v. 14, 207;
  is offered Island Isa, v. 249;
  takes leave of him, v. 256;
  writes to him, v. 266, n. 2;
  mentioned, v. 141, 165, 177, 217, 229, 234, 251.
MACLEOD, old Laird of, v. 143, 289.
MACLEOD, Lady (widow of the old laird),
  Johnson, welcomes, v. 207-8, 266, n. 2;
  argues on principles and practice, v. 210;
  on natural goodness, v. 211;
  on removing the family seat, v. 222;
  mentioned, v. 215.
MACLEOD of Lewis, v. 167.
MACLEOD, Magnus, v. 208.
MACLEOD, Malcolm,
  account of him, v. 161-2, 166, 168;
  befriends the Pretender, v. 190-9;
  arrested, v. 200-1;
  tells a legend, v. 171;
  mentioned, iii. 119; v. 179, 183.
MACLEOD, Rev. Neal, v. 338, 340.
MACLEOD, Sir Normand, v. 319.
MACLEOD, Professor, of Aberdeen, v. 92, 95, 251.
MACLEOD, Sir Roderick (Rorie More),
  his cascade, v. 207, 215, 223;
  bed, v. 208;
  horn, v. 212, 320;
  mentioned, v. 219.
MACLEOD, Roderick, v. 242.
MACLEOD, Sandie, v. 165;
  known as M'Cruslick, v. 166, 168, 178.
MACLEOD, Mrs., of Talisker, v. 253.
MACLEOD, ——, of Ulinish,
  account of him, v. 235;
  mentioned, v. 177, 211, 246, 248.
MACLONICH, Clan of, v. 297, n. 1.
MACLURE, Captain, v. 319.
MACMARTINS, v. 298.
MACNEIL of Barra, v. 227, n. 4.
M'NEILL, P. <i>Tranent and its Surroundings</i>, iii. 202, n. 1.
M'NICOL, Rev. Donald, ii. 308, n. 1.
MACPHERSON, James,
  account of his person and character by Dr. Carlyle, ii. 300, n. 1;
    by Hume, ii. 298, n. 1;
  buried in Westminster Abbey, ii. 298, n. 2;
  <i>Fragments of Ancient Poetry</i>, ii. 126, n. 2;
  Homer, translation of,  ii. 298; iii. 333, n. 2;
  'impudent fellow,' i. 432;
  newspapers,  'supervised' the, ii. 307, n. 4;
  Ossian, ii. 126, n. 2, 302;
    criticisms, &amp;c. on it:
      'abandoning one's mind to write such stuff,' iv. 183;
      'writing in that style,' v. 388;
    concocted, how, v. 242;
    Cuchullin's car and sword, v. 242;
    Giants of Patagonia, on a par with the, v. 387;
    gross imposition, v. 241;
    Highlander, testimony of a, iii. 51;
      manuscripts, no, ii. 297, 302, 309, 310, 311, 347, 383;
    Johnson's attack, Macpherson furious at, ii. 292;
      tries intimidation, ii. 296;
      writes to him, ii. 297;
        answer, ii. 297, n. 2, 298;
        rejoinder to Clark, iv. 252;
    opinions of <i>Ossian</i> formed by
      Blair, i. 396; ii. 296, 302, n. 2; v. 243;
      Boswell, ii. 302, 309; v. 388, n. 1, 389;
      Carlyle, Dr. A., ii. 302, n. 2;
      Dundas, President, ib.;
      Dempster, ii. 303; v. 408;
      Elibank, Lord, v. 388;
      Gibbon, ii. 302, n. 2;
      Hume, ii. 302, n. 2;
      Macqueen, Rev. D., v. 164, 240, 242;
      Oughton, Sir A., v. 45;
      Scott, Sir Walter, v. 164, n. 2;
      Shaw, Rev. W., pamphlet by, iv. 252;
      answer by Clark, ib.;
      Smith, Adam, ii. 302, n. 2;
      Smollett, ii. 302, n. 2;
    national pride concerned, iv. 141; v. 240, n. 6;
    'originals' of <i>Fingal</i>, ii. 294-6; iii. 286; v. 95, 388, 389;
    public interest at an end (1785), v. 389;
    rhapsody, a, ii. 126;
    wolf not mentioned, ii. 347;
  pension, ii. 307, n. 4;
  <i>Remarks on Johnson's Journey</i>, ii. 308, n. 1;
  subscription raised for him, ii. 302.
MACPHERSON, Dr. John,
  <i>Dissertations</i>, v. 159, 206:
  Latin verse, v. 265;
  mentioned, v. 119.
MACPHERSON, Rev. Martin, v. 159, 265, 267.
MACPHERSON, Miss, of Slate, v. 265.
MACQUARRY of Ormaig, iii. 133.
MACQUARRY, or Macquarrie, or Macquharrie, of Ulva,
  in debt, iii. 95, 101;
    estates sold, iii. 126-7, 133;
  ill-judged hospitality, v. 331, n. 1;
  Johnson visits him, v. 319-21;
  mentioned, ii. 308.
MACQUEEN of Anoch, v. 135-7, 140.
MACQUEEN, Rev. Donald,
  Aborigines, discovers a house of the, v. 236;
  Anaitis, a temple of, v. 218-221, 224;
  Boswell, letter to, v. 161;
  Edinburgh, visits, ii. 380;
  emigration, on, v. 205;
  Erse writings, ii. 380-1, 383;
  Johnson's regard for him, v. 224, 252, 257;
  learned man, a, v. 166, 251;
  <i>Ossian</i>, v. 164, 240, 242-3;
  second-sight, v. 163, 227;
  Sky, projects a book on, v. 257;
  witchcraft, v. 164;
  mentioned, v. 150, 170, 179, 183, 185, 215, 217, 237, 239, 248,
253, 254.
M'CRAAS, Clan of the, v. 142-3, 225.
M'CRAILS, v. 233.
MACRAY, Rev. W. D., <i>Annals of the Bodleian</i>, iv. 161, n. 1.
MACROBIUS,
  quoted by Johnson, i. 59;
  saying of Julia, iii. 25.
MACSWEYN, Mr. and Mrs., v. 289, 305.
MACSWEYN, Hugh, v. 289.
MAC SWINNY, Owen,
  recollections of Dryden, iii. 71;
  pun on the Cambrick Bill, iii. 71, n, 4.
<i>Mad Tom</i>, iii. 249.
MADAN, Rev. Martin, <i>Thoughts on Executive Justice</i>, iv. 328, n. 1.
MADDEN, Rev. Dr. Samuel,
  Johnson castigates his <i>Boulter's  Monument</i>, i. 318;
  orchards, on, iv. 205;
  premium scheme, his, i. 318;
  Whig, a great, ii. 321.
MADDOCKS, ——, the strawman, iii. 231, n. 2.
MADNESS,
  caused by indulgence of imagination, iv. 208;
  employment best suited for it, iv. 161, n. 4;
  evil spirits, people possessed with, iii. 176, n. 1;
  Gaubius defines it, i. 65;
  infamous persons supposed mad, iii. 176, n. 2;
  Johnson describes it in <i>Rasselas</i>, i. 65;
    dreads it, i. 66;
    is 'mad, at least not sober,' i. 35; v. 215;
  madmen love to be with those whom they fear, iii. 176;
  seek for pain, ib.;
    melancholy, confounded  with, iii. 175;
  relief from it in the bottle, i. 277, n. 1;
  Smart's prayers, shown by, i. 397; iv. 31, n. 5;
  turned upside down, iii. 27;
  undiscovered, iv. 31.
MADRID, v. 23, n. 1.
MAECENAS, iii. 296, n. 1.
<i>Mag. Extraordinary</i>, i. 156.
MAGAZINES, Goldsmith describes their origin, v. 59, n. 1.
MAGICIANS, Italian, iii. 382.
MAGISTRATE,
  anecdote of a dull country one, iv. 312;
  fear to call out the guards, iii. 46;
  how far they should tolerate false doctrine, ii. 249-253;
  salaries of the Westminster justices, iii. 217, n. 2.
<i>Mahogany</i>, a drink, iv. 78.
MAHOGANY WOOD, iv. 79.
MAHOMET, ii. 151.
MAHOMETAN WORLD, iv. 199.
MAHOMETANS, ii. 14, 151.
MAID OF HONOUR, flattery by a, iii. 322.
MAIDSTONE, iv. 328, n. 1.
MAINE, Sir Henry, <i>Borough English</i>, v. 320, n. 2.
MAINTENON, Mme. de, iv. 413, n. 2.
MAITLAND, Mr., one of Johnson's amanuenses, i. 187.
MAITTAIRE, M., <i>Senilia</i>, iv. 2; makes Carteret a dactyl, iv. 3.
MAJOR, John, <i>De Gestis Scotorum</i>, v. 406.
MAJORITY, distinguished from superiority, ii. 373.
<i>Make money</i>, iii. 196.
MALAGRIDA, iv. 174.
MALCOLM III, v. 320, n. 2.
MALE SUCCESSION. See SUCCESSION.
MALET DU PAN, ii. 366, n. 2.
MALLET, David, <i>alias</i> Malloch, ii. 159, n. 3; iv. 217;
  <i>Alfred</i>, v. 175, n. 2;
  <i>Bacon, Life of</i>, iii. 194;
  Bolingbroke's <i>Works</i>, edits, i. 268;
  Byng, writes against, ii. 128;
  <i>Critical Review</i>, writes in the, i. 409, n. 1;
  <i>Elvira</i>, i. 408;
  Garrick, fools, v. 175, n. 2;
  Gibbon <i>domesticated</i> with him, i. 268, n. 1;
  Hume's Scotticisms, ii. 72, n. 2;
  job, ready for any dirty, ii. 128;
  Johnson criticises his dramas, i. 408, n. 2;
    and his works, ii. 233, n. 1;
    draws his character, i. 268; ii. 159, n. 3;
    <i>Dictionary</i>, in, iv. 217;
  literary reputation, his, kept alive as long as he, ii. 233;
  Macgregor, by origin a, v. 127, n. 3;
  Malloch, published under the name of, iv. 216;
  <i>Margaret's Ghost</i>, iv. 229, n. 4;
  <i>Marlborough, Life of</i>, undertakes the, iii. 194;
  never begins it, iii. 386;
  receives money for it, v. 175, n. 2;
  <i>Pope's Essay on Man</i>, iii. 402;
  'prettiest drest puppet,' v. 174;
  Scotch accent, never caught in a, ii. 159;
  only Scot whom Scotchmen did not commend, ib., n. 3;
  Warburton, attacks, i. 329.
MALLET, Mrs., Hume and the deists, ii. 8, n. 4.
MALLET, P.H., <i>Histoire de Danemarck</i>, iii. 274, n. 2.
MALMESBURY, first Earl of, ii. 225, n. 2.
MALONE, Edmond, accuracy and justice, his love of, iv. 51;
  Addison's loan to Steele, iv. 52;
  Baretti's infidelity, ii. 8, n. 3;
  Boswell, becomes acquainted with, v. 1, n. 5;
    dedicates to him the <i>Tour to the Hebrides</i>, ii. 1, n. 2; v. 1;
      note added to it by him, iii. 323, n. 2;
    executor, iii. 301, n. 1;
    ignorance of law, ii. 21, n. 4;
    <i>Life of Johnson</i>, revises, i. 7;
      edits later editions, i. 9, n. 3, 15;
    time, by his hospitality wastes, i. 5, n. 2;
  Chatterton's poems,
    demonstrates the imposture in, iii. 50, n. 5; iv. 141, n. 1;
  Courtenay's <i>Poetical Review</i>, mentioned in, i. 222;
  death, i. 15, n. 1;
  Flood's lines on Johnson, iv. 424, n. 2;
  Garrick's election to the Club, i. 481, n. 3;
  Goldsmith's college days, i. 411;
  Gray's <i>Odes</i>, i. 403, n. 4;
  Hawkins, describes, i. 28, n. 1;
  Hawkesworth's death, v. 282, n. 2;
  hospitality, elegant, iv. 141;
  Johnson's bargain with the booksellers, iii. 111, n. 1;
    conversation, iv. 184, n. 2;
    epitaph, iv. 444;
    interpretation of two passages in <i>Hamlet</i>, iii. 5 n. 2;
    letters to him, iv. 141;
    'seldom started a subject,' iii. 307, n. 2;
    severe sayings, iv. 341;
    solitary, finds, iv. 218, n. 1;
    tribute to, i. 9, n. 2; iv. 142;
    witticism, fathers on Foote, ii. 410, n. 1;
  <i>Johnsonianissimus</i>, i. 7, n. 2;
  Literary Club, a member of the, i. 479; iv. 326;
  Milton's imagination of cheerful sensations, iv. 42, n. 6;
  'one of the best critics of our age,' i. 180, n. 1;
v. 78, n. 5, 361, n. 1, 399, n. 4;
  Parnell's <i>Hermit</i>, explains a passage in, iii. 393, n. 1;
  Piozzi's, Mrs., <i>Anecdotes</i>, criticises, iv. 341;
  <i>Prologue to Julia</i>, i. 262, n. 1;
  Reynolds's executor, iv. 133;
    Reynolds's plan for monuments in St. Paul's, iv. 423, n. 2;
  Shakespeare, edits, i. 8; iv. 142; v. 2;
  Walpole's, Sir R., reading, v. 93, n. 4;
  mentioned, iii. 305; iv. 344, 418.
MALPAS, iv. 300, n. 2.
MALPLAQUET, Battle of, ii. 183, n. 1.
MALTBY, Mr., i. 247, n. 3; iii. 201, n. 3.
MALTE, Chevalier de, story of a, v. 107.
MALTON, an inn-keeper, iii. 209.
MAMHEAD, i. 436, n. 3; ii. 371.
MAN,
  composite animal, iv. 91;
  defined, iii. 245; v. 32, n. 3;
  not a machine, v. 117;
  not good by nature, v. 211;
  pourtrayed by Shakespeare and Milton, iv. 72.
  See MANKIND.
<i>Man of Feeling</i>, i. 360.
<i>Man of the World</i>, i. 360, n. 2; v. 277.
<i>Managed</i> horse, v. 253, n. 2.
MANAGERS OF THEATRES, i. 196, n. 2.
MANCHESTER, iii. 123, 127, 135, n. 1;
  Whitaker's <i>History</i>, iii. 333.
MANDEVILLE, Bernard,
  Johnson influenced by him, iii. 56, n. 2, 292, n. 3;
  'private vices public benefits,' iii. 56, n. 2, 291-3;
  mentioned, i. 359, n. 3.
MANDOA, ii. 176.
<i>Manège</i> for Oxford, ii. 424.
MANILLA RANSOM, ii. 135.
MANKIND,
  Burke thinks better of them, iii. 236;
  Johnson finds them less just and more beneficent, ib.;
  opinions of Bolingbroke, Oxford, and Pitt, ib., n. 3;
  of Savage, iii. 237, n. l;
  characterless for the most part, iii. 280, n. 3;
  hostility one to the other, iii. 236, n. 4;
  kindness, wonderful, iii. 236, 237, n. 1.
  See MAN and WORLD.
MANLEY, Mrs., iv. 199, 200, n. 1.
MANN, Sir Horace, i. 279, n. 5.
MANNERS,
  change in them, v. 59-61, 230;
  elegance acquired imperceptibly, iii. 53;
  great, of the, iii. 353;
  history of them, v. 79;
  words describing them soon require notes, ii. 212.
<i>Manners</i>, a poem, i. 125.
MANNING, Owen, ii. 17.
MANNING, Mr., a compositor, iv. 321.
MANNINGHAM, Dr., iii. 161.
MANOR, a, co-extensive with the parish, ii. 243.
MANSFIELD, William Murray, first Earl of,
  Adams the architects, patronises, ii. 325, n. 3;
  air and manner, ii. 318;
  Americans, approves of burning the houses of the, iii. 429, n. 1;
  Baretti's trial, ii. 97, n. 1;
  believing <i>half</i> of what a man says, iv. 178;
  Carre's <i>Sermons</i>, praises, v. 28;
  confined to his Court, iii. 269;
  copy-right case, judgment in the, i. 437, n. 2;
  Douglas Cause, ii. 230, n. 1, 475;
  educated in England, ii. 194;
  Horne Tooke's trial, iii. 354, n. 3;
  Garrick, flatters, ii. 227;
  Generals and Admirals, compared with, iii. 265;
  Gordon Riots, his house burnt in the, iii. 428-9;
  Gordon's, Lord George, trial, iii. 427, n. 1;
  Johnson's definition of excise, i. 294, n. 9;
    estimate of his intellectual power, iv. 178, n. 2;
    greatest man next to him, ii. 336; v. 96;
    <i>Journey</i>, praises, ii. 318;
    never met him, ii. 158;
  lawyer, a great English, v. 395;
    not a mere lawyer, ii. 158;
  liberty of the press, tries to stifle the, i. 116, n. 1;
  literary fame, no, iii. 182;
  Oxford, entrance at, ii. 194, n. 3;
  Pope, friend of, ii. 158; iv. 50;
  Pope's lines to him, parodied by Browne, ii. 339, n. 1;
  popular party, hates the, iii. 120, n. 3;
  retirement, in, iv. 178, n. 2;
  Royal marriage act, drew the, ii. 152, n. 2;
  satires on dead kings, iii. 15. n. 3;
  Scotch schoolmaster's case, ii. 186;
  severity, loved, iii. 120, n. 3;
  Shebbeare, sentences, iii. 315, n. 1.
  Somerset the negro, case of, iii. 87;
  speech on the_ Habeas Corpus Bill_, iii. 233, n. 1;
  at Lord Lovat's trial, i. 181, n. 1;
  <i>Stuart's Letters to Lord Mansfield</i>, ii. 229, 475;
  Sunday levees, ii. 318;
  untruthfulness, ii. 296, n. 2;
  Warburton, gets promotion for, ii. 37, n. 1.
MANT, Mr., i. 270, n. 1.
<i>Mantuanus, Johannes Baptista</i>, iv. 182.
MANUCCI, Count, ii. 390, 394; iii. 89, 91.
MANUFACTURERS,
  defined, ii. 188, n. 5;
  their wages, v. 263.
MANYFOLD River, iii. 188.
MAPHAEUS, iii. 21, n. 1.
MAR, Earl of, v. 227, n. 4.
MARANA, I. P., iv. 200, n. 2.
MARATHON, iii. 173, n. 3, 455; v. 334.
<i>Marc de Peau forte</i>, ii. 396.
MARCHI, ——, an engraver, iv. 421, n. 2.
MARCHMONT, Hugh, fourth Earl of,
  Boswell calls on him, iii. 342;
    talks of Johnson's definitions, iii. 343;
    gets particulars of Pope and Bolingbroke, iii. 344, 418;
  Johnson refuses to see him, iii. 344;
    sends him the <i>Lives</i>, iii. 392;
    calls on him, ib.;
    shows inattention, iv. 50;
  Pope's executor, iv. 51;
  mentioned in Pope's <i>Grotto</i>, ib.;
  Scotch accent, his, ii. 160.
MARCUS ANTONINUS, iii. 172.
MARGATE, iv. 183, n. 2.
<i>Mariamne</i>, i. 102, n. 2.
MARIE ANTOINETTE, seen by Johnson, ii. 385, 394-5.
MARISCHAL, Lord, v. 200, n. 1.
MARKHAM, Archbishop of York,
  Johnson's bow, iv. 198, n. 2;
  sermon on parties, v. 36, n. 3.
MARKHAM, Dr., iii. 366.
MARKLAND, Jeremiah,
  account of him, iv. 161, n. 3;
  referred to, iv. 172, n. 3.
MARLAY, Dean Richard, afterwards Bishop of Waterford,
  Deanery of Ferns, iv. 73;
  humour, his, iv. 73, n. 1;
  Johnson turned from a wolf-dog into a lap-dog, iv. 73;
  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;
  mentioned, iv. 78.
MARLBOROUGH, John, first Duke of,
  Bolingbroke's allusion to him, v. 126, n. 2;
  calm temper, his, i. 12;
  epigram on him, ii. 451;
  hypothetical appearance to him of the devil, iv. 317, n. 3;
  Mallet's projected <i>Life</i>, iii. 194, 386; v. 175, n. 2;
  officers, his, useless, v. 445;
  Oldfield, Dr., anecdote of, iii. 57;
  mentioned, ii. 182.
MARLBOROUGH, Sarah, Duchess of,
  Addison's dedication to her, v. 376, n. 3;
  <i>Apology</i>, i. 153; v. 175;
    censured by Johnson, i. 153, 333, n. 2;
  Johnson's character of her, v. 175;
  <i>Love in a Hollow Tree</i>, reprints, iv. 80;
  her will, v. 175, n. 2.
MARLBOROUGH, Charles, second Duke of, ii. 246, n. 1.
MARLBOROUGH, George, third Duke of, v. 303, 459.
<i>Marmor Norfolciense</i>, i. 141;
  reprinted, i. 142;
  praised by Pope, i. 143.
MARRIAGE,
  advice about it, ii. 109, n. 2, 110;
  fortune, with women of, iii. 3;
  inferiors in rank, with, ii. 328;
  late in life, ii. 128;
  Lord Chancellor, might be made by the, ii. 461;
  love, for, iii. 3;
  natural to man, not, ii. 165;
  necessary for a man more than a woman, ii. 471;
  reasons for marrying, ib.;
  parents' control over a daughter's inclination, iii. 377;
  pretty woman, with a, iv. 131;
  prudence, but inclination, not from, ii. 101;
  prudent and virtuous most desirable, i. 382;
  second time, for a, ii. 76, 77, 128;
  service, ii. 110;
  society a party to the contract, iii. 25;
  widow, marrying a, ii. 77.
MARRIAGE BILL, Royal, ii. 152, 224, n. 1.
MARSEILLES, i. 340, n. 1.
MARSHALL, W.H., <i>Minutes of Agriculture</i>, iii. 313.
MARSILI, Dr., i. 322, 371.
MARTIAL, Elphinston's translation, iii. 258;
  Johnson's fondness for him, i. 122, n. 4;
  lines translated by F. Lewis, i. 225, n. 3;
  quoted, v. 429, n. 2.
MARTIN, M.,
  <i>Western Isles</i>, Johnson read it when a child, i 450; iii. 454; v. 13;
    copy in the Advocates' Library, v. 13, n. 3;
    quoted, v. 168, 170, 179, 209, n. 3; style bad, iii. 243;
  <i>Voyage to St. Kilda</i>, ii. 51, n. 3, 52, n. 1.
MARTINE, George, v. 61.
MARTINELLI, Signor, anecdote of Charles Townshend, ii. 222;
  writes a <i>History of England</i>, ii. 220;
    it should not be continued to the present day, ii. 221.
MARTINS, printers of Edinburgh, iii. 110.
<i>Martinus Scriblerus</i>,
  Imitators of Shakespeare ridiculed, ii. 225, n. 2.
  See under ARBUTHNOT.
MARTYRDOM, ii. 250.
<i>Martyrdom of Theodora</i>, i. 312.
MARY MAGDALEN, iv. 6.
MARY, Queen of Scots, Buchanan's verses to her, i. 460;
  Holyrood House, v. 43;
  Inch Keith, v. 55-6;
  inscription for her picture, ii. 270, 280, 283, 293, n. 2;
  Johnson reproaches the Scotch with her death, v. 40;
  Tytler's <i>Vindication</i>, i. 354; ii. 305.
MARY II, QUEEN, Johnson attacks her, i. 333, n. 2;
  mentions her in his definition of <i>Revolution</i>, i. 2 n. 1.
MASENIUS, i. 229.
MASON, Rev. William, Akenside, inferior to, iii. 32;
   <i>Caractacus</i>, ii. 335;
  Colman's <i>Odes to Obscurity</i>, ridiculed in, ii. 334;
  'cool Mason,' ii. 334; <i>Elfrida</i>, ii. 335;
  Goldsmith speaks of his 'formal school,' i. 404, n. 1;
  Gray's <i>Ode on Vicissitude</i>, adds to, iv. 138, n. 4; v. 424;
  <i>Heroick Epistle</i>, ascribed to Walpole, iv. 315;
    Chambers's <i>Dissertation on Oriental Gardening</i> ridiculed in it,
iv. 60, n. 7; v. 186;
    Goldsmith reads it to Johnson, iv. 113;
    quotations from it,
      'Here, too, O King of vengeance,' &amp;c., v. 186;
      'So when some John,' &amp;c., iii. 272, n. 2;
      'Who breathe the sweets,' &amp;c., iv. 113, n. 3;
    mentioned, i. 388, n. 3;
  Johnson's works, did not taste, ii. 335;
  <i>Memoirs of Gray</i>, Boswell's model in his <i>Life of Johnson</i>, i. 29;
    its excellence shown, i. 31, n. 3;
    Johnson 'found it mighty dull,' iii. 31;
      praises Gray's letters, ib., n. 1;
    Temple's character of Gray adopted in it, ii. 316;
  <i>Memoirs of W. Whitehead</i>, i. 31;
  Murray, the bookseller, prosecutes, iii. 294;
  Prig and Whig, a, iii. 294;
  Sherlock, Rev. Martin, mentions the, iv. 320, n. 4;
  mentioned, iv. 298, n. 3.
MASON, Mrs. (afterwards Lady Macclesfield and Mrs. Brett).
  See under MACCLESFIELD, Countess of.
MASQUERADES, ii. 205.
MASS, Idolatry of the, ii. 105.
MASS-HOUSE, iii. 429, n. 2.
MASSES FOR THE DEAD, ii. 105.
MASSILLON, v. 88, 311.
MASSINGER, Philip, <i>The Picture</i>, iii. 406.
MASSINGHAM, iv. 134.
MASTERS, Mrs., i. 242; iv. 246.
MATERIALISM, ii. 150.
MATHEMATICS,
  all men equally capable of attaining them, ii. 437;
  Goldsmith's low opinion of them, i, 411, n. 3.
MATHIAS, Mr., iv. 89.
MATLOCK, v. 430.
<i>Matrimonial Thought</i>, a, ii. 110.
MATTER, non-existence of, i. 471.
MATTHEW PARIS, iv. 310, n. 3.
MATY, Dr. Matthew,
  <i>Bibliotheque Britannique</i>, i. 284;
  Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>, reviews, i. 284, n. 3;
  'little black dog,' i. 284;
  <i>Memoirs of Chesterfield</i>, iv. 102, n. 4.
MAUPERTUIS, ii. 54.
MAURICE, Rev. F. D., ii. 122, n. 6.
MAURICE, Thomas, <i>Poems and Miscellaneous Pieces</i>, iii. 370, n. 2.
MAWBEY, Sir Joseph, iii. 82, n. 2.
MAXWELL, Rev. Dr., <i>Collectanea</i> of Johnson, ii. 116-133.
MAYO, Rev. Dr.,
  dines at Mr. Dilly's in 1773, ii. 247-255;
    in 1778, iii. 284-300;
    in 1784, iv. 330;
  freedom of the will, on the, iii. 290;
  liberty of conscience, ii. 249-252;
  'Literary Anvil,' called the, ii. 252, n. 2.
MAYO, Mrs., sutile pictures, her, iii. 284, n. 4.
MAYOR, Professor J.E.B., iv. 229, n. 2.
MAYORS OF LONDON, election, iii. 356, 459.
MEAD, Dr.,
  account of him, iii. 355, n. 2;
  Johnson writes Dr. James's dedication to him, i. 159;
  lived in the broad sunshine of life, iii. 355;
  on the needful quantity of sleep, iii. 169.
MEALS, regular, iii. 305.
<i>Medea</i>, at the Opera-house, iii. 91, n. 2.
MEDICATED BATHS, ii. 99.
MEDICINE, medical knowledge from abroad, i. 367.
  See under JOHNSON, physic.
<i>Meditation on a Pudding</i>, v. 352.
MEDITERRANEAN, The,
  grand object of travelling, iii. 36, 456;
  subject for a poem, iii. 36.
MEEKE, Rev. Mr., i. 272, 274.
MELANCHOLY,
  acuteness not a proof of, iii. 87;
  constitutional, v. 381;
  foolish to indulge it, iii. 135;
  madness, allied to, iii. 175;
  remedies against it,
    'Be not solitary, be not idle,' iii. 415;
    employment and hardships, iii. 176, 180, 368;
    exercise, i. 64, 446;
    hidden, should be, iii. 368, 421;
    moderation in eating and drinking, i. 446; iii. 5;
    occupation  of the mind and society, i. 446; ii. 423; iii. 5;
    thinking it down madness, ii. 440;
    retreats for the mind, as many as possible, ib.;
  some men free from it, iii. 5.
  See BOSWELL, hypochondria, and JOHNSON, melancholy.
MELANCHTHON,
  Boswell's letter from his tomb, ii. 3, n. 1; iii. 118, 122, n. 2;
  punctuality, his, i. 32;
  'the old religion,' ii. 105; iii. 122, n. 2.
MELCHISEDEC,
  an authority on the law of entail, ii. 414, n. 2;
  Warburton's reply to Lowth's version of his story, v. 423.
MELMOTH, William (Pliny),
  at Bath, iii. 422;
  belief in a particular Providence, iv. 272, n. 4;
  <i>Fitzosborne's Letters</i>, iii. 424;
  reduced to whistle, ib.
MELTING-DAYS, ii. 337.
MELVILLE, Viscount. See under DUNDAS, Henry.
MEMIS, Dr., a litigious physician, ii. 291, 296; iii. 95, 101;
  Johnson's argument in his case, ii. 372.
<i>Memoirs of Frederick III</i> [<i>II</i>], <i>King of Prussia</i>, i. 308.
<i>Memoirs of Miss Sydney Biddulph</i>, i. 358, n. 4, 389.
<i>Memoirs of Scriblerus</i>. See ARBUTHNOT.
<i>Memorials of Westminster Abbey</i>. See STANLEY, DEAN.
MEMORY, art of attention, iv. 126, n. 6;
  failure of it, iii. 191;
  morbid oblivion, v. 68;
  remembering and recollecting distinguished, iv. 126;
  scenes improve by it, v. 333;
  tricks played by it, v. 68.
  See under JOHNSON, memory.
MEN, have the upper hand of women, iii. 52.
  See MANKIND.
MÉNAGE, Gilles, Bayle's character of him, iv. 428, n. 2;
  <i>Menagiana</i>, epigram on the Molinists and the Jansenists, iii. 341, n. 1;
  puns on <i>corps</i> and <i>fort</i>, ii. 241;
  Queen of France and the hour, iii. 322, n. 3.
MENANDER, quoted, iii. 9, n. 3.
MENTAL DISEASES. See MELANCHOLY.
MENZIES, Mr., of Culdares, v. 394.
MERCHANTS, Addison's Sir Andrew Freeport, v. 328;
  Chatham praises fair merchants, v. 327, n. 4;
  compared with Scotch landlords, i. 409;
  munificence in spending, iv. 4;
  'a new species of gentleman,' i. 491, n. 3.
<i>Mercheta Mulierum</i>, v. 320.
MERCIER, L.S., ii. 366, n. 2.
MERIT, weighed against money, i. 440-3;
  men of merit, iv. 172.
MERRIMENT, scheme of it hopeless, i. 331, n. 5.
<i>.Messiah</i>, Johnson's Latin version of Pope's, i. 61.
METAPHORS, their excellence, iii. 174;
  inaccuracy, iv. 386, n. 1.
<i>Metaphysical</i> defined, ii. 259, n. 3.
METAPHYSICAL POETS, iv. 38.
METAPHYSICAL TAILOR, a, iii. 443; iv. 187.
METAPHYSICS, Burke's inaptitude for them, i. 472, n. 2;
  Johnson fond of them, i. 70;
  withheld from studying them, v. 109, n. 3.
METASTASIO, iii. 162, n. 4.
METCALFE, Philip, described by Miss Burney, iv. 159, n. 2;
  Johnson's charity, anecdote of, iv. 132;
  with him at Brighton, ii. 133, n. 1; iv. 159-60;
  Reynolds's executor, iv. 159, n. 2;
  Round-Robin, signs the, iii. 83, n. 3.
METHOD, life to be thrown into a, iii. 94.
METHODISTS, bitterness, their, v. 392;
  cannot explain their excellence, v. 392;
  Cock Lane Ghost, adopt the, i. 407, n. 1;
  convicts, effects on, iv. 329;
  Dodd's <i>Address</i>, offended by, iii. 121;
  Johnson consulted by two young women, ii. 120;
  <i>Humphry Clinker</i>, mentioned in, ii. 123, n. 2;
  <i>Hypocrite, The</i>, ii. 321;
  inward light, ii. 126;
  Moravians, quarrel with the, iii. 122, n. 1;
  origin of the name, i. 458, n. 3;
  Oxford, expulsion of six from, ii. 187;
  rise of the sect, i. 68, n. 1;
  sincere, how far, ii. 123;
  success in preaching, i. 458; ii. 123; v. 391-2;
  term of reproach, i. 458, n. 3;
  Wales, in, v. 451.
METTERNICH, Prince, iv. 27, n. 1.
MEYER, Dr., ii. 253, n. 2.
MEYNELL, 'old,' Johnson intimate with his family, i. 82;
  saying about foreigners, i. 115, n. 1; iv. 15;
    about London, iii. 379.
MEYNELL, Miss (Mrs. Fitzherbert), i. 83.
MICKLE, William Julius, account of him, ii. 182, n. 3;
  Boswell and Johnson dine with him at Wheatley, iv. 308;
  <i>Cumnor Hall</i> and Sir Walter Scott, v. 349, n. 1;
  Garrick, quarrel with, ii. 182, n. 3; v. 349, n. 1;
  Johnson, never had a rough word from, iv. 250;
  <i>Lusiad, The</i>, ii. 182;
    dispute with Johnson about it, iv. 250;
  mentioned, iii. 37.
MICROSCOPES, ii. 38.
MICYLLUS, v. 430.
MIDDLE AGES, iv. 133, 170.
MIDDLE CLASS, absence of it abroad, ii. 402, n. 1;
  in France, ii. 394, 402;
  in Scotland, ib., n. 1;
  happy in England, ii. 402.
MIDDLE STATE after death, i. 240; ii. 105; v. 356.
MIDDLESEX, Earl of, i. 367.
MIDDLESEX, Under-sheriff and Dr. Shebbeare, iii. 315, n. 1.
MIDDLESEX Election, Boswell's difference with Johnson, iii. 221;
  Johnson's discussion with Lord Newhaven, iii. 408;
  <i>False Alarm</i>, i. 134; ii. 111;
  <i>Patriot</i>, ii. 286;
  petitions, ii. 103;
  Townshend refuses to pay the land-tax, iii. 460.
MIDDLETON, Lady Diana, v. 97, n. 5.
MIDDLEWICH, v. 432.
MIDGELEY, Dr., iv. 200.
MIGRATION of birds, ii. 55, 248.
MILITARY character and life. See SOLDIERS.
<i>Military Dictionary</i>, i. 138.
MILITARY spirit, injured by trade, ii. 218.
MILITIA BILL of 1756, i. 36, n. 4; 307, n. 4; ii. 321, n. 4;
  Act of 1757, iii. 360, n. 3;
  for Scotch Militia Bill: See under SCOTLAND;
  drillings in 1778, iii. 360, 365, n. 4;
  Scotch officers of Militia, iii. 399, n. 2.
'MILKING the bull,' i. 444.
MILL, James, birth, v. 75, n. 2;
  in the East India House, ii. 289, n. 2;
  likeness to Johnson, iv. III, n. 3.
MILL, John Stuart,
  difference in pay of men and women, on the, ii. 217, n. 1;
  in the East India House, ii. 289, n. 2;
  precocity, i. 148, n. 1;
  teaching, old and new systems of, ii. 146, n. 4.
MILLAR, Andrew, the bookseller, account of him, i. 287, n. 3;
  Hume's <i>History of England</i>, publishes, v. 31, n. 1;
  Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>, one of the proprietors of, i. 183;
  Robertson's <i>Scotland</i>, publishes, iii. 334;
  'thanks God,' i. 287;
  mentioned, i. 243, 303, n. 1.
MILLER, Sir John, ii. 338; iii. 68.
MILLER, John, printer of the Evening Post, iv. 140, n. 1.
MILLER, Lady, ii. 336.
MILLER, Philip, v. 78, n. 3, 456, n. 2.
MILLER, Professor John, v. 369, n. 5.
MILMAN, Dean, iv. 202, n. 1.
MILNER, Joseph, i. 458, n. 3.
MILTON, John, Adam, description of, iv. 72, n. 3;
  <i>Areopagitica</i>, ii. 60, n. 3;
  blank verse, iv. 42-3;
    puzzles a shepherd, iv. 43, n. 1;
  Boccage's translation, iv. 331, n. 1;
  books, few called for in his time, iv. 217, n. 4;
  borrows out of pride, v. 92, n. 4;
  Boswell, a wonder to, iv. 42;
    Malone's explanation, ib., n. 6;
  character, equal to his, ii. 257, n. 1;
  confidence in himself, i. 199, n. 3;
  college exercises, i. 60, n. 6;
  condescension  in writing for children, ii. 408, n. 3;
  disdainful of help or hindrance, i. 131, n. 2;
  Dryden's lines on him: ii. 336; v. 86;
  early manuscripts, i. 204, n. 1; iv. 184, n. 1;
  education, 'wonders' in, ii. 407, n. 5;
  frugality of a commonwealth, iii. 292, n. 3;
  giant among the pigmies, iv. 19, n. 2;
  grand-daughter, benefit for his, i. 227;
    Johnson writes the <i>Prologue</i>, ib.;
    recommends a subscription for her, i. 230;
  habitations, i. 111; iii. 405;
  Johnson's abhorrence of his political principles, i. 227; iv. 41-2;
    admiration of his blank verse, iv. 42, n. 7;
    blazon of his excellence, iv. 40;
    does him 'illustrious justice,' i. 227, 230-1;
    criticises minor poems, iv. 99, n. i, 305;
      <i>Samson Agonistes</i>, i. 231, n. 2;
    earlier and later estimates of him, ii. 239;
    supposed enmity to him, i. 230; ii. 239, n. 2; iv. 64;
  Lauder's imposition, i. 229;
  Lawrence, Dr., descended from
    'Lawrence of virtuous father virtuous son,' ii. 296, n. 1;
  <i>Life</i>, by Johnson, iv. 40-4;
  monument in Westminster Abbey, i. 227, n. 4;
    one suggested in St. Paul's, ii. 239;
  'Milton, <i>Mr</i>. John,' iv. 325;
  <i>Milton no Plagiary</i>, i. 229, n. 1;
  <i>Paradise Lost</i>, the war of Heaven, ii. 239, n. 3;
  Phidias, a, iv. 99, n. 1;
  public prayers omitted, i. 67, n. 2, 418, n. 1;
  schoolmaster, i. 85, n. 2, 97, n. 2; ii. 407, n. 5;
  shoe-latchets, wore, v. 19;
  style, distinguished by his, iii. 280;
  'thinking in him,' ii. 239;
  <i>Tractate on Education</i>, iii. 358;
  quotations—
      <i>Allegro</i>, 1. 49, iii. 159, n. 2;
            l. 118, i. 130;—1. 134, i. 387;
      <i>Lycidas</i>, 1. 156, v. 282, n. 1;
      <i>Paradise Lost</i> (i. 263), iii. 326, n. 3; (i. 596),
            iii. 363, n. 1; (ii. 94, 146), iii. 296, n.
            1; (ii. 146), iv. 399, n. 6; (ii. 561), i. 82,
            n. 2; (ii. 846), iv. 273, n. 1, v. 48,
            n. 1; (iv. 35), iv. 304, n. 2; (iv. 343),
            iv. 305, n. 2; (v. 353), iv. 27, n. 6; (vii.
            26), iv. 42, n. 1; (x. 743), iii. 53, n. 3;
      <i>Penseroso</i>, 1. 63, i. 323, n. 4;
      <i>Sonnets</i>, xxi., iv. 254, n. 5.
MIMICRY, ii. 154.
MIND, management of it, ii. 440;
  mechanical, looked at as, v. 35;
  physician's art useless to one not at ease, iii. 164;
  putting one's whole mind to an object, ii. 472;
  retreats for it, ii. 440.
  See WEATHER.
MINISTERS of the Church, popular election of, ii. 244.
MINISTRIES, attempt at silence in the House of Commons, iii. 235;
  concessions to the people, ii. 353; iii. 3;
  list of ministries from 1770-1784, iv. 170, n. 1;
  Lord North's ministry, its duration, iv. 170, n. 1;
    (1771) contest with the City, iv. 140, n. 1;
    (1773) much enfeebled, ii. 208;
      want of power, v. 57;
    (1774) feeble, iv. 69;
    (1775) merit not rewarded, ii. 352;
      neither stable nor grateful, ii. 348;
      feeble and timid, ii. 355;
      too little power, ii. 352;
    (1776) 'timidity of our scoundrels,' iii. 1;
      imbecility, iii. 46, ib., n. 5;
      ministers asked to the Lord Mayor's feast for the first time for
         seven years, iii. 460;
    (1778) 'now there is no power,' iii. 356;
    (1779) Johnson has no delight in talking of public affairs, iii.
         408;
      Horace Walpole's account, ib., n. 4;
    (1780), afraid to repress persecution of Papists in Scotland, iii.
         427, n. 1;
      feebleness at the Gordon Riots, iii. 430;
    (1781), Johnson against it, iv. 81, 100;
      gives thanks for its dissolution, iv. 139;
      bunch of imbecility, ib.;
      successors could hardly do worse, iv. 140, n. 3;
      timidity, iv. 200;
    struggles between two sets of ministers in 1784, iv. 260,
            n. 2.
MINORCA, ii. 176; iii. 246.
'<i>Mira cano</i>,' iii. 304.
MIRABEAU, 'dramatised his death,' v. 397, n. 1;
  his motion about Corsica, ii. 71, n. 1.
MIRACLES, i. 444; iii. 188.
<i>Mirror, The</i>, iv. 390.
MIRTH, the measure of a man's understanding, ii. 378, n. 2.
<i>Miscellaneous and Fugitive Pieces
  by the Authour of the Rambler</i>, ii. 270.
<i>Miscellaneous Observations on the Tragedy of Macbeth</i>,
  published 1745, i. 175;
  praised by Warburton, i. 176;
  criticism on Hanmer, i. 178.
MISDEMEANOUR, defined, iii. 214.
<i>Misella</i>, i. 223.
MISERS, contemptible philosophically, v. 112;
  few in England, v. 112;
  must be miserable, iii. 322;
  no man born a miser, iii. 322.
MISERY, balance of misery, iv. 300;
  'doom of man,' iii. 198;
  hypocrisy of misery, iv. 71;
  misery of want, iii. 26.
MISFORTUNES, talking of one's, iv. 31.
<i>Miss</i>, a, v. 185, n. 1.
MISSIONARIES, sanguine and untrustworthy, v. 391.
MISTRESSES, i. 381.
MITCHELL, Mr., English Minister at Berlin, iii. 463, n. 2.
MITCHELL, a tradesman, i. 238, n. 2.
MOB rule, iii. 383.
  See RIOTS.
<i>Modern Characters from Shakespeare</i>, iii. 255.
<i>Modern Characters from the Classics</i>, iii. 279.
MODERN TIMES, better than ancient, iv. 217; v. 77.
MODERNISING an author, iv. 315.
MODESTY, how far natural, iii. 352.
<i>Modus</i>, i. 283; iii. 323.
MOLIÈRE, <i>Avare</i>, v. 277;
  goes round the world, v. 311;
  <i>Misanthrope</i>, iii. 373, n. 4.
MOLINISTS, iii. 341, n. 1.
MOLTZER, Jacques, v. 430, n. 2.
MONARCHY, iii. 46.
MONASTERIES,
  austerities treated of in <i>Rambler</i> and <i>Idler</i>, ii. 435;
  bodily labour wanted, ii. 390;
  Carthusian, unreasonableness of becoming a, ii. 435;
    their silence absurd, ib.;
  Johnson curious to see them, i. 365;
    saying to a Lady Abbess, ii. 435;
  men enter them who cannot govern themselves, i. 365; ii. 24;
  monastic morality, iii. 292;
  when allowable, ii. 10;
  unfit for the young, v. 62.
MONBODDO, Lord (James Burnet),
  account of him, ii. 74, n. 1; v. 77;
  air bath, his, iii. 168;
  ancestors, superiority of our, v. 77;
  Boswell, letter from, v. 74;
  Condamine's <i>Savage Girl</i>, v. 110;
  copyright, v. 72;
  Dictionary-makers, i 296, n. 3;
  Egyptians, ancient, iv. 125;
  Elzevir Johnson, an, ii. 189, n. 2; v. 74, n. 3;
  enthusiastical farmer, v. 78, 111;
  Erse writings, ii. 380-1, 383;
  <i>Farmer Burnet</i>, v. 77, 111;
  Gory, his black servant, v. 82;
  helping him downhill, v. 242;
  Home's <i>Douglas</i> better than Shakespeare, v. 362, n. 1;
  'humour, <i>incolumi gravitate</i>,'  v. 375;
  Johnson's <i>Journey</i>, receives a copy of, iii. 102;
    meets, in Edinburgh, v. 394;
      in London, iv. 273;
    no love for, ii. 74, n. 1; ib., n. 2; iv. 273, n. 1; v. 74;
    pleased with him, v. 83;
    style, criticised, iii. 173;
    visits him, iv. 273, n. 1; v. 74, 77-83, 377;
  Judge <i>a posteriori</i>, v. 45;
  Knight the negro, case of, iii. 213;
  'Monny,' iv. 273, n. 1;
  'nation,' his, ii. 219;
  <i>Origin and Progress of Language</i>, ii. 74, n. 1; 259, n. 5;
  Ouran-Outang, capabilities of the, v. 46, 248;
  primitive state of human nature, ii. 259;
  savage life, admiration of, ii. 74, 147; v. 81;
  son, his, v. 81;
  tail, theory of the, v. 45, iii., 330;
  talked nonsense, ii. 74; v. 111;
  mentioned, ii. 53, n. 1; iii. 126, 129; iv. 1, n. 1.
MONCKTON, Hon. Mary (Countess of Cork),
  account of her, iv. 108 n. 4;
  Boswell gets drunk in her house, iv. 109;
    sends her verses, iv. 110, n. 1;
  Johnson at her assembly, iv. 156, n. 1;
    calls her a dunce, iv. 109;
    promises her to go and see Mrs. Siddons, ii. 324, n. 2; iv.
       242, n. 3.
MONEY, abilities needed in getting it, iii. 382;
  advantages that it can give, iv. 14, 126, 152;
  arguments against it, i. 441;
  awkwardness in counting it, iv. 27;
  change in its value, v. 321, n. 1;
  circulating, happiness produced by its, ii. 429;
iii. 177, 249, 292, nn. 2 and 3;
  conveniences where it is plentiful, v. 61;
  country, keeping it in the, ii. 428-9;
  domestic satisfaction, laid out on, ii. 352;
  economy in its use, iii. 265;
  enjoyed, should be early, ii. 226;
  excludes but one evil—poverty, iii. 160;
  getting it not all a man's business, iii. 182;
  gives nothing extraordinary, iv. 126;
  hoarded, iv. 173;
  increase of it breaks down subordination, iii. 262;
  increase of it in one nation impoverishes another, ii. 430;
  influence, gives, v. 112;
  influence of loans, ii. 167; iv. 222;
  influence by patronising young men, ii. 167;
  'insolence of wealth,' iii. 316;
  interest, iii. 340;
  investments, iv. 164;
  '<i>make</i> money,' iii. 196;
  money-getting defended, ii. 323; iv. 126;
  occupation, purchases, iii. 180;
  respect gained by it, ii. 153;
  save and spend, happiest those who, iii. 322;
  spending it better than giving it, iii. 56; iv. 173;
  trade, not increased by, ii. 98;
  travelling, difficulties of, when there was little money, iii. 177;
  writing for it, iii. 19.
  See DEBTS.
MONKS. See MONASTERIES.
MONKS OF MEDMENHAM ABBEY, i. 125, n. 1.
MONMOUTH, Duke of, v. 357.
MONNOYE, De La, iii. 322, n. 3.
MONRO, Dr., iv. 263-4.
MONTACUTE, Lords, iv. 160.
MONTAGU, Edward, iii. 408, n. 3.
MONTAGU, Lady Wortley, contempt for Richardson, iv. 117, n. 1.
MONTAGU, Mrs., account of her writings, ii. 88, n. 3;
  air and manner, iii. 244, n. 2;
  Barry's picture, in, iv. 224, n. 1;
  Bath, at, iii. 422-4;
  benevolence, her, iii. 48, n. 1;
  Boswell excluded from her house, iv. 64;
  character by Miss Burney, iii. 48, n. 1, 244, n. 2; iv. 275, n. 3;
    by Johnson and Mrs. Thrale, ib.;
  Cumberland's <i>Feast of Reason</i>, described in, iv. 64;
    Garrick, praises, v. 245;
  <i>Essay on Shakespeare</i>, ii. 88; iv. 16, n. 2; v. 245;
    Boswell's controversy with Mrs. Piozzi about it, ib., n. 2;
  house, her new, iv. 64, n. 1, 65, n. 1; ill, iii. 434;
  Johnson, drops, iv. 73;
    gives her a catalogue of De Foe's works, iii. 267;
    high praise of her, iv. 275;
    letters to her: See JOHNSON, letters;
    'not highly gratified; ii. 130;
    quarrels with, iii. 425, n. 3;
      war with him, iv. 64, 65, n. 1;
    reconciled, iv. 65, n. 1, 239, n. 4;
    the support of her assemblies, iv. 64, n. 1;
  lived to a great age, iv. 275, n. 3;
  Lyttelton, Lord, friendship with, iv. 64;
  Mounsey, Dr., mentions, ii. 64, n. 2;
  <i>par pluribus</i>, iii. 424;
  portrait by Miss Reynolds, iii. 244;
  pretence to learning, iii. 244;
  Shakespeare, patronises, ii. 92, n. 3;
  trembles  for him, ii. 89;
  Stillingfleet's blue stockings, iv. 108, n. 2;
  Williams, Mrs., pensions, iii. 48, n. 1; iv. 65, n. 1;
  wits, among the, iv. 103, n. 1.
MONTAGUE, Basil, son of Lord Sandwich, iii. 383, n. 3.
MONTAGUE, Frederic,
  moves to abolish  the fast of Jan. 30, ii. 152, n. 1.
MONTAIGNE, on wise men playing the fool, i. 3, n. 2.
MONTESQUIEU,
  <i>Esprit des Lois</i>,
    Helvetius advises against its publication, v. 42, n. 1;
  on the abolition of torture, i. 467, n. 1;
  influence on Hume, ii. 53, n. 2;
  <i>Lettres Persanes</i>, iii. 291, n. 1;
  quotes the practice of unknown countries, v. 209.
MONTGOMERIE, Margaret (Mrs. Boswell). See BOSWELL, Mrs.
MONTGOMERY, Colonel, v. 149.
<i>Monthly Review</i>, Badcock's correspondence, iv. 443, n. 5;
  Griffiths, owned by, iii. 30, n. 1, 32, n. 2;
  hostile to the Church, ii. 40, iii. 32;
  payment to writers, iv. 214, n. 2;
  price of a fourth share, iii. 32, n. 2;
  Smollett, attack on, iii. 32, n. 2;
  written by duller men than the Critical Reviewers, iii. 32.
MONTROSE, second Duke of,
  Boswell gets drunk at his house, iv. 109;
  shot a highwayman, iii. 240, n. 1;
  mentioned, v. 359, n. 1.
MONTROSE, third Duke of. See GRAHAM, Marquis of.
MONTROSE, first Marquis of,
  letters to the Laird of Col, v. 298-9;
  his execution, v. 298, n. 1.
MONTROSE, House of, iii. 382.
MONUMENTS IN ST. PAUL'S CATHEDRAL, ii. 239; iv. 423, n. 2.
MONVILLE, Mr., ii. 390, 391.
MOODY, the player, clapped on the back by Tom Davies, ii. 344;
  mentioned, ii. 340, 342.
MOON, twenty-sixth day of the new, iv. 30.
MOOR, Dr., Professor of Greek at Glasgow, iii. 39, n. 2.
MOORE, Edward, account of him, iii. 424, n. 1;
  edits <i>The World</i>, i. 202, n. 4, 257, n. 3.
MOORE, Dr. John, confounded with  Edward Moore, iii. 424, n. 1;
  describes the streets of Paris, ii. 394, n. 3;
  meets Johnson at Mr. Hoole's, iv. 281, n. 3.
MOORE, Rev. Mr., Ordinary of Newgate, iv. 329, n. 3.
MOORE, Thomas, lines on Sheridan's funeral, i. 227, n. 4.
MOORS OF BARBARY, ii. 391.
MORALITY, substitution for it when violated, ii. 129.
MORAVIANS, intimate with Johnson, iv. 410;
  missions, v. 391;
  quarrel with the Methodists, iii. 122, n. 1.
MORAY, Bishop of, v. 114, n. 2.
MORE, Hannah, <i>Bas Bleu</i>, iii. 293, n. 5; iv. 108;
  boarding-school, kept a, iv. 341, n. 5;
  books found guilty of popery, iii. 427, n. 1;
  Boswell's tenderness for Johnson's failings, beseeches, i. 30, n. 4;
  Boswell's and Garrick's imitation of Johnson, ii. 326, n. 1;
  Covent-Garden mob, iv. 279, n. 2;
  dates, indifferent to, iv. 88, n. 1;
  Fox, describes, iv. 292, n. 3;
  Garrick's death and the Literary Club, i. 481, n. 3;
    explanation of Johnson's harshness, iii. 184, n. 5;
    flatters, iii. 293;
  and Mrs. Garrick, friendship with, iii. 293, n. 4;
  Garrick's, Mrs., 'Chaplain,' iv. 96;
  George III and Hutton the Moravian, iv. 410, n. 6;
  Henderson, John, of Pembroke College, iv. 298, n. 2;
  hides her face, iv. 99;
  Home's <i>Douglas</i>, v. 362, n. 1;
  Johnson brilliant and good-humoured, iii. 260, n. 5;
    criticism of Milton, iv. 99, n. 1, 305;
    death an era in literature, iv. 421, n. 1;
    finds her reading Pascal, iv. 88, n. 1;
    flatters, iii. 293; iv. 341;
    flattered by him, iii. 293, n. 5; iv. 341, n. 6;
    and George III, ii. 42, n. 2;
    health in 1782, iv. 149, n. 3;
      1783, iv. 220, n. 3;
    in Grosvenor Square iv. 72, n. 1;
    introduced to, iv. 341, n. 6;
    <i>Journey</i>, sale of, ii. 310, n. 2;
    likens her to Hannibal, iv. 149, n. 3;
      praises her, iv. 275;
    and Macbeth's heath, v. 115, n. 3;
    'mild radiance of the setting sun,' iv. 220;
    prayer for Dr. Brocklesby, iv. 414, n. 3;
    regret that he had no profession, iii. 309, n. 1;
    shows her Pembroke College, i. 75, n. 5; iv. 151, n. 2;
    and <i>The Siege of Sinope</i>, iii. 259, n. 1;
  Kennicott, Dr., ii. 128, n. 1;
  Kennicott, Mrs., iv. 285, n. 1;
  Langton's devotion to Johnson, iv. 266, n. 3;
  <i>Leonidas</i> Glover and Horace Walpole, v. 116, n. 4;
  lived to a great age, iv. 275; n. 3;
  Monboddo, Lord, v. 77, n. 2;
  <i>Nine</i>, iv. 96, n. 3;
  Paoli's mixture of languages, ii. 81, n. 3;
  Percy, tragedy of, iii. 293, n. 4;
  respectable, use of the term, iii. 241, n. 2;
  scarlet dress in a court-mourning, iv. 325, n. 2;
  <i>Sensibility</i>, iv. 151, n. 2;
  Shipley's, Bishop, assembly, iv. 75, n. 3;
  Thrale's death, iv. 84, n. 3;
  <i>Tom Jones</i>, reads, ii. 174, n. 2;
  Vesey's, Mrs., parties, iii. 424, n. 3;
  Williams, Miss, i. 232, n. 1;
  mentioned, iii. 256.
MORE, Dr. Henry,
  <i>Divine Dialogues</i>, v. 294;
  a visionary, ii. 162.
MORE, Rorie. See MACLEOD, Sir Roderick.
MORE, Sir Thomas,
  death, not deserted by his mirth in, v. 397, n. 1;
  epigram on him, v. 430;
  manuscripts in the Bodleian, i. 290;
  <i>Utopia</i> quoted, iii. 202, n. 3.
<i>More</i>, Celtic for <i>great</i>, ii. 267, n. 2; v. 208.
MORELL, Dr. Thomas, v. 350.
MORELLET, Abbé, ii. 60, n. 4.
MORÉRI'S <i>Dictionary</i>, v. 311.
MORGAGNI, ii. 55.
MORGANN, Maurice,
  anecdotes of Johnson, iv. 192;
  <i>Essay on Falstaff</i>, iv. 192.
<i>Morning Chronicle</i>, iv. 149, 150, n. 2.
<i>Morning Post</i>, iv. 296, n. 3.
MORRIS, Corbyn, iv. 105, n. 4.
MORRIS, Miss, iv. 417.
MORRIS, Mr. Secretary, ii. 274, n. 7.
MORRISON, Mr. Alfred, <i>Collection of Autographs</i>,
  Johnson's letter to Ryland, iv. 369, n. 3;
    to Taylor, ii. 468, n. 2; iv. 139, n. 4;
  Johnson's receipt for payment for the <i>Lives</i>, iv. 35, n. 3.
MORRISON, Kenneth, v. 284.
MORTIMER, Dr., Rector of Lincoln College, Oxford, ii. 268, n. 2.
MOSAICAL CHRONOLOGY, i. 366.
MOSER, Mr., Keeper of the Royal Academy, ii. 257, n. 2; iv. 227.
MOSES,
  Brydone's antimosaical remark, ii. 467;
  evidence required from him by Pharoah, ii. 150;
  Song of Moses paraphrased, v. 265.
MOSS, Dr., iv. 73.
MOTIVES, i. 397.
MOTTEUX, Mr., ii. 398.
MOUNSEY, Dr.,
  account of him, ii. 64, n. 2;
  Johnson vehement against him, ii. 64.
MOUNT EDGECUMBE, ii. 227, n. 2; v. 1O2.
MOUNTAINOUS REGIONS, iii. 455.
MOUNTSTUART, Lord (second Earl of Bute),
  Boswell's dedication to him, ii. 20, n. 4, 23;
    friendship with him, iv. 128; v. 58;
  embassy to Turin, iii. 411;
  Scotch Militia bill, ii. 431; iii. 1;
  mentioned, i. 375, 380; iii. 91-2.
<i>Mourning Bride</i>. See under CONGREVE, William.
<i>Mouse's likeness</i>, v. 39, n. 2.
<i>Muddy</i>, ii. 362, 460.
MUDGE, Colonel William, i. 378, n. 2.
MUDGE, Dr. John, i. 378;
 letter from Johnson, iv. 240.
MUDGE, Mr., i. 486.
MUDGE, Rev. Zachariah,
  death, iv. 77, n. 3;
  'idolised in the west,' i. 378;
  Johnson's character of him, iv. 76-7;
  <i>Sermons</i>, iv. 77, 98.
MUFFINS, buttered, iii. 384.
MUIR, a Scotch advocate,
  transported for sedition, i. 467, n. 1; iv. 125, n. 2.
MULGRAVE, second Baron, i, 116, n. 1; iii. 8; v. 362, n. 1.
MULLER, Mr., of Woolwich Academy, i. 351, n. 1.
MULSO, Miss. See CHAPONE, Mrs.
MUMMIES, iv. 125.
MUNSTER, Bishop of, iii. 330, n. 1.
MURCHISON, ——, a factor, v. 141, 146.
MURDER, prescription of, v. 24, 87.
MURDOCH, Dr., <i>Life of Thomson</i>, iii. 117, 133, 359.
MURISON, Principal, v. 63-4.
MURPHY, Arthur,
  account of him, i. 356, n. 2;
  Ben Jonson's <i>Fall of Mortimer</i>, iii. 78, n. 4;
  Boswell's introduction to Johnson, i. 391, n. 4;
  Campbell's <i>Diary</i>, mentioned in, ii. 338, n. 2;
  counsel in the Copyright Case, ii. 273;
  Davies's stories, perhaps the subject of one of, iii. 40, n. 3;
  <i>Elements of Criticism</i>, ii. 90;
  <i>Epilogue to Irene</i>,
  mistaken about the, i. 197, n. 4;
  Essex Head Club, member of the, iv. 254, 438;
  <i>Euphrasia</i>, v. 103, n. 1;
  <i>False Delicacy</i>, ii. 48, n. 2;
  Foote's <i>Life</i>, ought to write, iii. 185, n. 1;
  Garrick, controversy with, i. 327, n. 1;
    description of a dinner at his house, ii. 155, n. 2;
    of his funeral, iv. 208, n. 1;
    sarcasm against him, ii. 349, n. 6;
  <i>Gray's Inn Journal</i>, i. 309, 328, 356;
  inaccuracy  about a visit to Oxford, iv. 233, n. 3;
  Johnson, account of his introduction to, i. 268, n. 4, 356;
    apologises to, for repeating some oaths,  ii. 338, n. 2; iii. 40;
    an ardent friend, iv. 344, n. 2;
    colloquial Latin, ii. 125, n. 5;
    contempt of Garrick's acting, ii. 92, n. 4;
    <i>Debates</i>, i. 504;
    degree of Doctor, i. 488, n. 3;
    desire of life, iv. 418, n. 1;
    desire for reconciliation, ii. 256, n. 1;
    dread of death, iv. 399, n. 6;
    and Garrick introduced to the Thrales, i. 493;
    levee, attends, ii. 118;
    life in Johnson's Court, ii. 5. n. 1;
    love for him, ii. 127;
    pension, i. 374-5;
    praises him as a dramatic writer, ii. 127;
    sorrow for Garrick's death, iii. 371, n. 1;
      proposal to write his <i>Life</i>, ib.;
    style, i. 221, n. 4;
    and Thurlow, iv. 327, n. 4;
    will, not in, iv. 402, n. 2;
    wit and humour, ii. 262, n. 2;
  Mason's <i>Memoirs of Gray</i>, iii. 31;
  Mounsey, Dr., ii. 64, n. 2;
  <i>Mur</i>, ii. 258;
  <i>Orphan of China</i>, i. 324, n. 1, 327;
  <i>Poetical Epistle to S. Johnson</i>, i. 355;
  portrait at Streatham, iv. 158, n. 1;
  <i>Review of Burke's Sublime and Beautiful</i>, i. 310;
  <i>Romeo and Juliet</i> as altered by Garrick, v. 244, n. 2;
  <i>Selections</i>, disapproves of, iii. 29;
  Shakespeare and Congreve compared, ii. 86;
  Simpson, Joseph, account of, iii. 28;
  Smith's <i>Wealth of Nations</i>, cannot read, ii. 430, n. 1;
  <i>Spectator</i>, chance writers in the, iii. 33;
  Thrale's friendship for him, i. 493, n. 1;
  'Tig and Tirry,' ii. 127, n. 3;
  <i>Zenobia</i>, ii. 127, n. 3;
   mentioned, ii. 82, 374, 469, n. 2; iii. 27; iv. 273.
MURRAY, Sir Alexander, v. 293.
MURRAY, Lady Augusta, ii. 152, n. 2.
MURRAY, Lord George, ii. 270, n. 1.
MURRAY, James Stuart, Earl of, the Regent, v. 114, n. 2.
MURRAY, John, the bookseller, iii. 294.
MURRAY, —— (Lord Henderland),
  Johnson, dines with, iii. 8-16;
  silent in his company, v. 50;
  sends his son to Westminster School, iii. 12.
MURRAY, R., Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, i. 489.
MURRAY, William. See MANSFIELD, Earl of.
<i>Musarum Deliciae</i>, iii. 319, n. 1.
<i>Muse in Livery</i>, ii. 446.
<i>Muses' Welcome to King James</i>, v. 57, 80.
MUSGRAVE, Dr. Samuel,
  dines with Reynolds, iii. 318-20;
  parades his Greek, iii. 318, n, 1.
MUSGRAVE, Mr. (afterwards Sir) Richard, ii. 343, n. 2; iv. 323, n. 1.
MUSGRAVE, Sir William, i. 152.
MUSIC,
  effect of it explained, iii. 198;
  emoluments of performers, ii. 225;
  melancholy effects produced <i>per se</i> bad, iv. 22;
  in <i>Revelation</i>, ii. 163.
  See JOHNSON, music.
<i>Musical Travels of Joel Collyer</i>, i. 315.
MUSWELL HILL, ii. 378, n. 1.
MUTINY ACT. See SOLDIERS.
<i>Mutual</i> friend, iii. 103, n. 1.
MYDDELTON, Rev. Mr., v. 453.
MYDDLETON, Colonel,
  family motto, v. 450, n. 2;
  Johnson, erects a memorial to, iv. 421, n. 2; v. 453, n. 1;
    visits him, v. 443, 452-3.
MYLNE, Robert, i. 351.
<i>Mysargyrus</i>, i. 252, 254, n. 1.
MYSTERY, iii. 324
  Boswell's love of <i>the mysterious</i>, iv. 94, n. 2;
  'the wisdom of blockheads,' iii. 324, n. 4;
  universal, iii. 342.
MYTHOLOGY,
  its dark and dismal regions, iv. 16, n. 4;
  can no longer be used by poets, iv. 17;
  none among savages, iii. 50.</p>

<h3>N.</h3>

<p>NABOBS, ii. 339, n. 2; v. 106.<br/>

NAIL, growth of the, iii. 398, n. 3.<br/>

NAIRNE, Colonel, v. 69-70.<br/>

NAIRNE, William (Lord Dunsinan),<br/>

  accompanies Johnson to St. Andrews, v. 54, 56, 58, 62;<br/>

    to Edinburgh Castle, v. 386;<br/>

  praised by him, v. 53;<br/>

    and by Sir Walter Scott, ib., n. 3;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 41, 126; v. 38, 394-5.<br/>

NAIRNE, Mr., the optician, iii. 21, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Namby-Pamby</i>, i. 179.<br/>

NAMES, queer-sounding, iii. 76.<br/>

NAMPTWICH, v. 432.<br/>

NAP after dinner, ii. 407.<br/>

NAPIER, Rev. Alexander, edition of Boswell, ii. 391, n. 4.<br/>

NAPLES, iii. 19; v. 54.<br/>

<i>Naples, History of the Kingdom of</i>, iv. 3, n. 3.<br/>

NAPOLEON BONAPARTE, ii. 393, n. 7.<br/>

NARES, Rev. Mr., iv. 389.<br/>

NARROW place, how far the mind grows narrow in a, ii. 246<br/>

NARROWNESS in expenses, v. 345-6;<br/>

  a fit of narrowness, iv. 191.<br/>

NASH, Alderman, iii. 460.<br/>

NASH, Richard ('Beau'),<br/>

  engages in a religious dispute at Bath, iv. 289, n. 1;<br/>

  'here comes a fool,' i. 3, nn. 2, 3;<br/>

  a pen his torpedo, i. 159, n. 4;<br/>

  put down smoking at Bath, v. 60, n. 2.<br/>

NASH, Rev. Dr.,<br/>

  _History of <i>Worcestershire</i>, i. 75, n. 3; iii. 271, n. 5.<br/>

NATION, state of common life, v. 109, n. 6.<br/>

NATIONAL CHARACTER, no permanence in, ii. 194.<br/>

NATIONAL DEBT, ii. 127; iii. 408, n. 4.<br/>

NATIONAL FAITH, iv, 21.<br/>

NATIVE PLACE, love of one's, iv. 147.<br/>

NATIVES. See under INDIANS and SAVAGES.<br/>

NATURAL HISTORY, iii. 273.<br/>

<i>Natural History</i>. See GOLDSMITH, Oliver, <i>Animated Nature</i>.<br/>

NATURAL PHILOSOPHY, ii. 55.<br/>

NATURE, Boswell's want of relish for its beauties, i. 461;<br/>

  all men envious and thieves by nature, iii. 271;<br/>

  state of nature, iii. 49; v. 88.<br/>

  See under SAVAGES.<br/>

<i>Nature Displayed</i>, iv. 311.<br/>

<i>Navigation</i>, ii. 136, n. 2; iii. 362.<br/>

<i>Navvy</i>, iii. 362, n. 5.<br/>

NEANDER, ii. 274.<br/>

NECESSITY, an eternal, v. 47.<br/>

  See under FREE WILL.<br/>

NECKER, Mme., Garrick's <i>Hamlet</i>, v. 38, n. 2.<br/>

NEGROES. See SLAVES.<br/>

NEGROES,—law-cases. See KNIGHT, Joseph, and SOMERSET, James.<br/>

NELSON, Robert, Festivals and Fasts, ii. 458; iv. 311;<br/>

  friend of Archibald Campbell, v. 357; the<br/>

  original of Sir Charles Grandison, ii. 458, n. 3.<br/>

NENI, Count, iii. 35.<br/>

NERO, ii. 255, n. 4.<br/>

NERVES, weak, iv. 280.<br/>

NETHERLANDS, Johnson's projected tour, i. 470; iii. 454;<br/>

  Temple's account of the drinking, iii. 330.<br/>

<i>Network</i>, defined, i. 294.<br/>

NEUFCHATEL, ii. 215.<br/>

<i>New Bath Guide</i>, i. 388, n. 3.<br/>

NEW FLOODGATE IRON, iv. 193.<br/>

NEW PLACE, effects of a, iii. 128.<br/>

<i>New Protestant Litany</i>, i. 176, n. 2.<br/>

NEW SOUTH WALES, iv. 125, n. 1.<br/>

<i>New Testament</i>, most difficult book in the world, iii. 298.<br/>

NEW ZEALAND, iii. 49.<br/>

NEWBERY, Francis,<br/>

  bookseller, and dealer in quack medicines, v. 30, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson's advice to him about a fiddle, iii. 242, n. 1.<br/>

NEWBERY, John, the bookseller,<br/>

  children's books, iv. 8, n. 3;<br/>

  Goldsmith's publisher, iii. 100, n. 1; v. 30, n. 3;<br/>

  James's powder, vendor of, iii. 4, n. 1<br/>

  'Jack Whirler' of The Idler, v. 30, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson's debts to him, i. 350, n. 3;<br/>

  publishes his Idler, i. 330, 335, n. 1;<br/>

  The World Displayed, i. 345.<br/>

NEWCASTLE, famous townsmen, v. 16, n. 4;<br/>

  Johnson passes through it, ii. 264, 266; v. 16;<br/>

  story of a ghost, iii. 297, 394.<br/>

NEWCASTLE, first Duke of, i. 151.<br/>

NEWCASTLE, second Duke of, iv. 63.<br/>

NEWCASTLE FLY, ii. 377, n. 1.<br/>

NEWCASTLE ship-master, a, v. 312.<br/>

NEWCASTLE-UNDER-LINE, iii. 135, n. 1.<br/>

NEWCOME, Colonel (in The Newcomes), ii. 300, n. 3.<br/>

NEWFOUNDLAND FISHERY, iii. 203, n. 1.<br/>

NEWHALL, Lord, iii. 151.<br/>

NEWHAVEN, Lord, iii. 407-8.<br/>

NEWMAN, Cardinal,<br/>

  Johnson's truthfulness, iv. 305, n. 3;<br/>

  Oxford about the year 1770, ii. 445, n. 1.<br/>

NEWMARKET, i. 383, n. 3.<br/>

NEWMARSH, Captain, v. 134.<br/>

NEWPORT School in Shropshire, i. 50, 132, n. 1.<br/>

NEWSPAPERS,<br/>

  booksellers, governed by the, v. 402, n. l;<br/>

  everything put into them, iii. 79, 330;<br/>

  knowledge diffused, ii. 170;<br/>

  Macpherson's 'supervision,' ii. 307, n. 4;<br/>

  in the time of the Usurpation, v. 366;<br/>

  whole world informed, ii. 208.<br/>

NEWSWRITERS, ii. 170, n. 3; iii. 267, n. 1.<br/>

NEWTON, Sir Isaac,<br/>

  <i>Arguments in Proof of a Deity</i>, i. 309;<br/>

  a worthy carman will get to heaven as well as he, iii. 288;<br/>

  Bentley's verses, mentioned in, iv. 23, n. 3;<br/>

  free from singularities, ii. 74, n, 3;<br/>

  house in St. Martin's Street, iv. 134;<br/>

  infidelity, reported early, i. 455;<br/>

  Johnson's admiration of him, ii. 125;<br/>

  Leibnitz and Clarke, v. 287;<br/>

  mathematical knowledge unequalled, iv. 217;<br/>

  poet,  as a, v. 35;<br/>

 'stone dolls,' ii. 439, n. 1.<br/>

NEWTON, John, Bishop of Bristol and Dean of St. Paul's,<br/>

  <i>Account of his own Life</i>, iv. 285, n. 3, 286, n. 1;<br/>

  censures Johnson, iv. 285, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson's retaliation, iv. 285-6;<br/>

  <i>Dissertation on the Prophecies</i>, iv. 286;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 79, n. 2.<br/>

NEWTON, John, of Lichfield, father of the Bishop, i. 79, n. 2.<br/>

NEWTON, Rev. John,<br/>

  engaged in the slave trade, iii. 203, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson's 'conversion,' iv. 272, n. 1.<br/>

NEWTON, Dr., i. 227, n. 3.<br/>

NEWTON, Mr., of Lichfield, v. 428.<br/>

NICCOLSON, of Scorbreck, v. 195.<br/>

NICHOLS, Dr. Frank,<br/>

  <i>De Anima Medica</i>, iii. 163;<br/>

  physician to the King, turned out by Lord Bute, ii. 354;<br/>

  rule of attendance as a physician, iii. 164.<br/>

NICHOLS, John,<br/>

  account of him, iv. 437;<br/>

  _Anecdotes of William Bowyer, iv. 161, 369, 437;<br/>

  Essex Head Club, member of the, iv. 254, 437, 438;<br/>

  <i>Gent. Mag</i>., edits, i. 90, n. 4; iv. 437;<br/>

  Johnson, anecdotes of, iv. 407, n. 4;<br/>

    funeral, invitation card to, iv. 419, n. 1;<br/>

    and Henderson the actor, iv. 244, n. 2;<br/>

    last days, iv. 407-10; v. 69, n. 1;<br/>

    letters to him: See under JOHNSON, letters;<br/>

    spells his name wrongly, iv. 36, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Literary Anecdotes of the Eighteenth Century</i>, iv. 369, n. 1, 437;<br/>

  Thirlby, memoir of, iv. 161, n. 4;<br/>

  Tyers and <i>The Idler</i>, iii. 308, n. 3;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 84, n. 3, 99, 102, n. 2, 135, 231, n. 2; iv. 359.<br/>

NICHOLSON ——, an advocate, v. 213.<br/>

NICKNAMES, i. 385, n. 1.<br/>

NICOL, George, the bookseller, iv. 251;<br/>

  letter from Johnson, iv. 365.<br/>

NICOLAIDA, ii. 379.<br/>

NIDIFICATION, ii. 249.<br/>

NIGHT-CAPS, v. 268-9, 306.<br/>

<i>Night Thoughts</i>. See YOUNG.<br/>

NILE, a waterfall on it, i. 88, n. 2.<br/>

NISBET, Rev. Mr., v. 73.<br/>

NISBET, ——, an advocate, v. 213.<br/>

NISBETT, Sir John, iii. 205, n. 1.<br/>

NITROGEN, discovery of, iv. 237, n. 6.<br/>

<i>No Sir</i>,<br/>

  as used by Johnson, ii. 452; iii. 70, 178, 185, 304;<br/>

  explained by Boswell, iv. 315.<br/>

NOBILITY,<br/>

  fortune-seeking, ii. 126;<br/>

  respect due to them, i. 447; iv. 114;<br/>

  in virtue above the average, iii. 353;<br/>

  unconstitutional influence in elections, iv. 248, 250.<br/>

NOBLE, Mark, <i>Memoirs of Cromwell</i>, iv. 236, n. 1.<br/>

NOBLE AUTHORS, iv. 113-5.<br/>

NOBLEMAN, an indolent Scotch, iv. 87.<br/>

NODOT, Abbe, iii. 286, n. 2.<br/>

NOLLEKENS, Joseph, iii. 219, n. 1; iv. 421, n. 2.<br/>

NOLLEKENS, Mrs., iii. 217.<br/>

NONJURORS, Archibald Campbell, v. 357;<br/>

  Cibber's <i>Nonjuror</i>, applicable to them, ii. 321;<br/>

  comparative criminality in taking and refusing the oaths, ii. 321-2;<br/>

  could not reason, iv. 286-8;<br/>

  Falconer, Bishop, iii. 371-2;<br/>

  Johnson never in one of their meeting-houses, iv. 288.<br/>

<i>Nonpareil</i>, v. 414, n. 2.<br/>

NORBURY PARK, iv. 43.<br/>

NORES, Jason de, ii. 444.<br/>

NORFOLK, militia, i. 307, n. 4;<br/>

  sale of the <i>Rambler</i> in the county, i. 208, n. 3;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 134.<br/>

<i>Norfolk Prophecy</i>, i. 143.<br/>

NORRIS,—, a staymaker, i. 103.<br/>

NORTH, Dudley. See LONG.<br/>

NORTH, Frederick, Lord (second Earl of Guilford),<br/>

  Coalition Ministry, iv. 223, n. I;<br/>

  Conciliatory Propositions, iii. 221;<br/>

  <i>Falkland's Islands</i>, stops the sale of, ii. 136;<br/>

  Fox's dismissal from the Treasury, ii. 274, n. 7;<br/>

  Gibbon, admired by, v. 269, n. 1;<br/>

  humour, v. 409;<br/>

  Johnson, fear of, as an M.P., ii. 137, n. 3;<br/>

    no friend to, ii. 147;<br/>

    goes to his house, v. 248;<br/>

    proposes the degree of LL.D. for, ii. 318, n. 1;<br/>

    writes to the Vice-Chancellor, ii. 331;<br/>

  King's agent, merely the, ii. 355, n. i;<br/>

  Macdonald, Mr., abused by, v. 153, n. 1;<br/>

  ministry: See under MINISTRIES;<br/>

  subscription to the Articles, upholds, ii. 150, n. 7;<br/>

  Thurlow's hatred of him, iv. 349, n. 3.<br/>

<i>North Briton</i>, essay by Chatterton, iii. 201, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson's definitions, i. 295, n. 1.<br/>

  See under WILKES.<br/>

NORTH POLE, voyage to the, v. 236.<br/>

NORTHAMPTONSHIRE, v. 295.<br/>

NORTHCOTE, James, Boswell's self-reproach, v. 129, <i>i</i> 1;<br/>

  Goldsmith and <i>Cross-Readings</i>, iv. 322, n. 2;<br/>

  Goldsmith on entering a room, i. 413, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's character of Mudge, iv. 77, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson's interview with George III, ii. 42, n. 2;<br/>

  Lowe the painter, iv. 202, n. 1;<br/>

  Pulteney's oratory, i. 152, n. 3;<br/>

  Reynolds appointed painter to the King, iv. 366, n. 2;<br/>

    dinner-parties, iv. 312, n. 3;<br/>

    influence in the Academy, iv. 219, n. 4;<br/>

    and Mrs. Siddons, iv. 242, n. 2;<br/>

    use of 'Sir,' i. 245, n. 3;<br/>

    visit to Devonshire, i. 377, n. 1;<br/>

  Reynolds's, Miss, pictures, iv. 229, n. 4;<br/>

  sees <i>She Stoops to Conquer</i>, ii. 233, n. 3.<br/>

NORTHEND, iv. 28, n. 7.<br/>

NORTHINGTON, Lord Chancellor, i. 45, n. 4.<br/>

NORTHINGTON, second Earl of, Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland in 1783, iv. 200.<br/>

NORTHUMBERLAND, a breed of reindeer, ii. 168, n. 1;<br/>

  plantations of trees, iii. 272;<br/>

  price of corn in 1778, iii. 226, n. 2.<br/>

NORTHUMBERLAND, first Duke of,<br/>

  <i>Capability</i> Brown his guest, iii. 400, n. 2;<br/>

  Dr. Mounsey at his table, ii. 64;<br/>

  Goldsmith's visionary project, iv. 22, n. 3;<br/>

  Irish vice-roy, ii. 132; iv. 22, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson, civility to, iii. 272, n. 3; iv. 117, n. 1.<br/>

NORTHUMBERLAND, Elizabeth Duchess of,<br/>

  Batheaston Vase, writes for the, ii. 337;<br/>

  Boswell boasts of her acquaintance, iii. 271, n. 5;<br/>

  Cock Lane Ghost, goes to hear the, i. 407, n, 1.<br/>

NORTHUMBERLAND, eighth Earl of, v. 403, n. 2.<br/>

NORTHUMBERLAND, Earls of, Dr. Percy's descent from them, iii. 271, n. 5.<br/>

NORTON, Sir Fletcher, first Lord Grantley,<br/>

  account of him, ii. 472, n. 1;<br/>

  his ignorance, ii. 91.<br/>

NORWAY, i. 425; ii. 103; v. 100, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Nose</i> of the mind, iv. 335.<br/>

<i>Notes and Queries</i>,<br/>

  Athenian blockhead, i. 73, n. 3;<br/>

  Bowles, William, of Heale, iv. 235, n. 5;<br/>

  Brooke's <i>Earl of Essex</i>, iv. 312, n. 5;<br/>

  Ford family, will and pedigree, i. 49, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson's calculations about walling a garden, iv. 205, n. 1;<br/>

    house in Bolt Court, ii. 427, n. 1;<br/>

    letter on having a stroke of palsy, reprint of, iv. 229, n. 2;<br/>

    (for his other letters to Hector, Taylor, &amp;c., See under JOHNSON,<br/>

letters);<br/>

    marriage register, i. 95, n. 2;<br/>

    and Maty, i. 284, n. 3;<br/>

    tutor to Mr. Whitby, i. 84, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson, Michael,<br/>

    publishes Floyer's [Greek: Pharmako-basanos] i. 36, n. 3;<br/>

  his marriage, i. 35, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson, Nathanael, i. 90, n. 3;<br/>

  Langton's <i>navigation</i>, ii. 136, n. 2;<br/>

  Pembroke College <i>Gaudy</i>, i. 273, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>solution of continuity</i>, iii. 419, n. 1;<br/>

  Swift 'a shallow fellow,' v. 44, n. 3;<br/>

  Taylor's, Dr., separation from his wife, i. 472, n. 4.<br/>

NOTTINGHAM,<br/>

  described by Hutton in 1741, i. 86, n. 2;<br/>

  fair, iii. 207, n. 3;<br/>

  a learned pig, iv. 373.<br/>

NOURSE, the bookseller, iii. 15, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Nouveau Tableau de Paris</i>, ii. 366, n. 2.<br/>

NOVA ZEMBLA, v. 392.<br/>

NOVALIS, iii. 11, n. 1.<br/>

NOVELTY,<br/>

  boys' restless desire for it, iii. 385;<br/>

  paper on it in <i>The Spectator</i>, iii. 33;<br/>

  Rousseau's love of it, i. 441;<br/>

    Goldsmith, ib., n. 1; iii. 376.<br/>

NOVEMBER THE FIFTH, Johnson's verses on it, i. 60.<br/>

NOWELL, Dr.,<br/>

  Boswell and Johnson dine with him, iv. 295;<br/>

  fast sermon on Jan. 30, ii. 152, n. 1; iv. 296.<br/>

NOYON, ii. 400.<br/>

<i>Nugae Antiquae</i>, iv. 180.<br/>

NUGENT, Colonel, ii. 136, n. 5.<br/>

NUGENT, Dr., account of him, i. 477, n. 4;<br/>

  member of the Literary Club, i. 477; ii. 17, 240;<br/>

  professor in the imaginary college, v. 108.<br/>

<i>Nullum numen adest</i>, &amp;c., iv. 180.<br/>

NUMBERS, science of. See ARITHMETIC and MATHEMATICS.<br/>

NUNCOMAR, iv. 70, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Nuremberg Chronicle</i>, v. 456.<br/>

NURSE, putting oneself to, ii. 474.<br/>

'Nux gar erchetai,'[Greek] ii. 57.<br/>

NUYS, iii. 235, n. 1.<br/>
</p>

<h3>O.</h3>

<p>OAKES, Mrs., i. 407, n. 3.
OAKOVER, v. 429-30.
OATHS,
  abjuration, oath of, ii. 220, 321, n. 4;
  examination under oath, v. 390;
  imposition of oaths, ii. 321, n. 4.
  See SWEARING.
OATS,
  defined, i. 294; iv. 168;
  oat-ale, ii. 463;
  oat-cakes eaten in Lichfield, ii. 463;
  oatmeal eaten dry, v. 308;
  'they who feed on it are barbarians,' v. 406.
OBEDIENCE, iii. 294.
OBJECTIONS may be made to everything, ii. 128; iii. 26.
OBLIGATIONS,
  moral and ritual, ii. 376;
  perfect and imperfect, ii. 250;
  Reynolds's reflection on gaining freedom from them, i. 246.
OBLIVION, iv. 27, n. 5;
  morbid, v. 68.
O'BRIEN, William, the actor,
  described by Walpole, iv. 243, n. 6;
  his marriage, ii. 328, n. 3.
OBSCENITY, repressed in Johnson's company, iv. 295.
OBSERVANCE OF DAYS, ii. 458.
<i>Observations on Diseases of the Army</i>, iv. 176, n. 1.
<i>Observations on his Britanick Majesty's Treaties, &amp;c</i>., i. 308.
<i>Observations on the Present State of Affairs</i>, i. 308, 310.
<i>Observer, The</i>, iv. 64.
OBSTINACY, must be overcome, ii. 184.
OCCUPATION, iii. 180;
  hereditary, v. 120.
O'CONNOR, Charles, Johnson's letters to him, i. 321; iii. 111.
OCTAVIA, iv. 446.
ODD, nothing odd will do long, ii. 449.
ODE, Goldsmith's account of one, iv. 13.
<i>Ode, Ad Urbanum</i>, i. 113.
<i>Ode, An</i>, i. 178.
<i>Ode, In Theatre</i>, ii. 324, n. 3.
<i>Ode on Solitude</i>, iii. 197.
<i>Ode on St. Cecilia's Day,</i> i. 420.
<i>Ode on the British Nation</i>, iv. 442.
<i>Ode on the Peace</i>, iv. 282.
<i>Ode on Winter</i>, i. 182.
<i>Ode to Friendship</i>, i. 158.
<i>Ode to Melancholy</i>, i. 122, n. 4.
<i>Ode to Mrs. Thrale</i>, a caricature, iv. 387.
<i>Ode to Mrs. Thrale</i>, written in Sky, v. 158.
<i>Ode to the Warlike Genius of Britain</i>, iii. 374.
<i>Ode upon the Isle of Sky</i>, v. 155.
<i>Odes. See</i> CIBBER, COLLEY, and GRAY, Thomas.
<i>Odes to Obscurity and Oblivion</i>, ii. 334.
ODIN, iii. 274.
ODYSSEY. See HOMER.
<i>Oedipus Tyrannus</i>,
  Johnson's preface to Maurice's translation, iii. 370, n. 2.
<i>Ofellus</i>, i. 104.
OFFELY, Mr., i. 97.
OFFICER. See SOLDIER.
OGDEN, Rev. Dr. Samuel, <i>Sermons</i>,
  Boswell edified by them, v. 29;
  caricatured by Rowlandson, ib., n. 1;
  Johnson wishes to read them, iii. 248;
    tries to, v. 29, 88;
  prevailed  on to read one aloud, v. 350;
  on original sin, iv. 123, n. 3;
  on prayer, v. 38, 58, 68, 282, 325;
  quotation from one, v. 351.
OGILBY, John, i. 55.
OGILVIE, Dr. John,
  <i>Poems</i>, i. 421, 423, n. 1;
  praises Scotland, i. 425.
OGILVY, Sir James, v. 227, n. 4.
OGLETHORPE, General,
  account of him, i. 127, n. 4, 128, n. 1;
  Belgrade, siege of, ii. 181;
  birth, ii. 180, n. 2;
  Boswell and the Corsicans, ii. 59, n. 1;
    to Shebbeare, introduces, iv. 112;
    communicates particulars of his life to, ii. 351 n. 3;
  Caligula and the Senate, iii. 283;
  dinners at his house, ii. 179, 217, 232, 350; iii. 52, 282;
v. 138, n. 1;
  duelling, defends, ii. 179;
  father, his, iv. 171;
  Georgia, colonises, i. 127, n. 4;
  Johnson's <i>London</i>, patronises, i. 127;
    visits, iv. 170;
    willing to write his <i>Life</i>, ii. 351;
  luxury, declaims against, iii. 282;
  'never completes what he has to say,' iii. 57;
  Pope's lines on him, i. 127, n. 4;
  Prendergast and Sir J. Friend, ii. 182;
  Prince of Wirtemberg and the glass of wine, ii. 180;
  vivacity and knowledge, iii. 56;
  Wesley, Charles, ill-uses, i. 127, n. 4.
OGLETHORPE, Mr., ii. 272.
'O'HARA, you are welcome,' v. 263.
OIL OF VITRIOL, ii. 155;
  Johnson's, v. 15, n. 1.
O'KANE, the harper, v. 315.
OKERTON, i. 194, n. 2.
OLD AGE, desirable, how far, iv. 156;
  evils, its, iii. 337;
  memory, failure of, iii. 191;
  men less tender in old age, v. 240, n. 2;
  mind growing torpid, iii. 254;
  <i>senectus</i>, iii. 344.
OLD BAILEY, <i>Sessional Reports</i>,
  Baretti's trial, ii. 97, n. 1;
  Bet  Flint's, iv. 103, n. 3;
  contain 'strong facts,' ii. 65.
<i>Old Man's Wish, The</i>, iv. 19.
OLD MEN, loss of the companions of their youth, iii. 217;
  putting themselves to nurse, ii. 474;
  supposed to be decayed in intellect, iv. 181.
OLD STREET CLUB, iii. 443-4; iv. 187.
OLD SWINFORD, v. 432.
OLDFIELD, Dr., iii. 57.
OLDHAM, John, <i>Imitation of Juvenal</i>, i. 118.
OLDMIXON, John, i. 294, n. 9.
OLDYS, William, account of him, i. 175;
  author of <i>Busy, curious, thirsty fly</i>, ii. 281, n. 5;
  <i>Harleian Catalogue</i>, compiles part of the, i. 28;
  Harleian Library, on the price paid for the, i. 154;
  notes on <i>Langbaine</i>, iii. 30, n. 1.
O'LEARY, Father Arthur,
  <i>Remarks on Wesley's Letter</i>, ii. 121, n. 1; v. 35 n. 3.
OLIVER, Alderman, iv. 140, n. 1.
OLIVER, Dame, i. 43.
  <i>Olla Podrida</i>, iv. 426, n. 3.
OMAI, iii. 8.
OMBERSLEY, v. 455.
ONSLOW, Arthur, the Speaker,
  challenged by Elwall the Quaker, ii. 164, n. 5;
  Richardson gave vails to his servants, v. 396.
OPERA GIRLS, in France, iv. 171.
OPIE, John, iv. 421, n. 2, 443.
OPINION, hurt by differences in it, iii. 380.
OPIUM, use of it, iv. 171.
OPPONENTS, good-humour with them, iii. 10;
  how they should be treated, ii. 442.
OPPOSITION, the, Johnson and Sir P.J. Clerk argue on it, iv. 81;
  describes it as meaning rebellion, iv. 139, n. 3;
  in 1783, describes it as 'factious,' iv. 164.
OPPOSITION increases political differences, v. 386.
ORANGE PEEL, Johnson's use of it, ii. 330, 331, n. 1; iv. 204;
  manufacture, iv. 204.
ORATORS cannot be translated, iii. 36.
ORATORY, action in speaking, i. 334; ii. 211;
  Johnson and Wilkes discuss it, iv. 104;
  a man's powers not to be estimated by it, ii. 339;
  old Sheridan's oratory, iv. 207, 222.
ORCHARDS, Johnson's advice, ii. 132;
  Madden's saying, iv. 205;
  unknown in many parts, iv. 206.
ORD, Mrs., iv. 1, n. 1, 325, n. 2.
ORDE, Lord Chief Baron, ii. 354, n. 4; v. 28.
ORDE, Miss, v. 28, n. 2.
ORDINARY OF NEWGATE, and the Cock Lane Ghost, i. 407, n. 1.
  See Rev. Mr. MOORE and Rev. Mr. VILLETTE.
ORFORD, third Earl of, iv. 334, n. 6.
ORFORD, fourth Earl of. See WALPOLE, Horace.
<i>Oriental Gardening</i>. See CHAMBERS, Sir William.
ORIGIN OF EVIL, v. 117, 366.
<i>Original Letters</i>. See WARNER, Rebecca.
ORIGINAL SIN, Johnson's paper on it, iv. 123;
  Ogden's sermon, ib., n. 3.
<i>Orlando Furioso</i>, i. 278, n. 1.
ORME, Captain, iv. 88.
ORME, Robert, the historian,
  admires Johnson's <i>Journey to the Western Islands</i>, ii. 300;
v. 408, n. 4;
    and his talk, iii. 284;
  mapping of  the East Indies and Highlands of Scotland compared, ii. 356.
ORMOND, House of,
  gives three Chancellors in succession to Oxford, i. 281, n. 1.
ORMOND, first Duke of, <i>Life</i> by Carte, v. 296, n. 1.
ORMOND, second Duke of,
  impeached, i. 281, n. 1;
  leads a Spanish expedition to Scotland, v. 140, n. 3.
<i>Orphan of China</i>. See MURPHY.
ORPHEUS, i. 458.
ORRERY, Earls of, a family of writers, v. 237.
ORRERY, first Earl of, a play-writer, v. 237.
ORRERY, fourth Earl of,
  Bentley's antagonist, v. 238, n. 1;
  his will, ib., n. 5.
ORRERY, fifth Earl of,
  anecdote of the Duchess of Buckingham, iii. 239;
  caught at literary eminence, ii. 129; iii. 183;
  dignified, not, iv. 174;
  feeble writer, i. 185, n. 3;
  feeble-minded, v. 238;
  Johnson describes his character, v. 238;
    <i>Dictionary</i>, presents, to the <i>Academia della Crusca</i>, i. 298;
      praises the <i>Plan</i> of it, i. 185;
    friendship with, i. 243;
    never sought after him, iii. 314;
    writes a dedication to him for Mrs. Lennox, i. 255;
  <i>Remarks on Swift</i>, i. 9, n. 1; iii. 249; iv. 39; v. 238;
  mentioned, iv. 17, n. 3, 29, n. 2.
ORTON, Job, <i>Memoirs of Doddridge</i>, v. 271.
OSBORN, a Birmingham printer, i. 86.
OSBORNE, Sir D'Anvers, iv. 181, n. 3.
OSBORNE, Francis, ii. 193.
OSBORNE, Thomas,
  Coxeter's collection of poets, buys, iii. 158;
  <i>Harleian Catalogue</i>, publishes the, i. 28, 154, 158;
  Harleian Library, buys the, i. 154;
  Johnson dates a letter from his shop, i. 161;
    beats him, i. 154, 375, n. 1; iii. 344;
    describes his 'impassive dulness,' i. 154, n. 2.
OSSIAN. See MACPHERSON, James.
OSSORY, Lord,
  member of the Literary Club, i. 479;
  mentioned, iii. 399, n. 2.
OSTENTATION,
  Boswell's rebuked, i. 465;
  shown in quoting Lords, iv. 183.
OTAHEITE,
  bread-tree, ii. 248;
  custom of eating dogs, ii. 232;
  mode of slaughtering animals, v. 246;
  rights of children, v. 330;
  savages from whom nothing can be learnt, iii. 49;
    Boswell's defence of them, iv. 308.
<i>Othello</i>, its moral, iii. 39.
OTWAY, Thomas,
  Johnson's opinion of him, iv. 21;
  neglected, ii. 341, n. 3;
  <i>Romeo and Juliet</i>, alters, v. 244, n. 2;
  tenderness, iv. 21, n. 1;
  tolling a bell, ii. 131, n. 2.
OUGHTON, Sir Adolphus, v. 43;
  his learning, v. 45, 124;
  quiets a military revolt, v. 142, n. 2;
  mentioned, v. 272, 394.
OURAN-OUTANG, v. 46, 248.
OVERALL, Bishop, v. 356, n. 2.
OVERBURY, Sir Thomas, ii. 76.
<i>Overbury, Sir Thomas</i>, a Tragedy, iii. 115.
OVERTON, Rev. J. H., <i>Life of William Law</i>, ii. 122, n. 6.
OVID,
  Sappho, ii. 181;
  quotations,
    <i>Ars Am</i>. 3. 121, v. 204, n. 4;
    <i>Ars Am</i>. 3. 339, ii. 238, n. 2;
    <i>Ep. ex. Ponto</i> I. 3, 35, iii. 178, n. 2; v. 265 n. 3;
    <i>Heroides</i> I. 2, v. 15, n. 5;
    <i>Heroides</i> I. 4, i. 242, n. 1;
    <i>Met</i>. I. 1, i. 387;
    <i>Met</i>. 1. 85, ii. 326, n. 1;
    <i>Met</i>. 2. 13, iii. 280;
    <i>Met</i>. iii. 724. i. 108;
    <i>Met</i>. xiii. 19, i. 314;
    <i>.Tristia</i>, iv. 10, 51, iv. 443.
OXFORD, Harley, first Earl of,
  Bolingbroke's character of him, iii. 236, n. 3.
OXFORD, second Earl of,
  <i>Bibliotheca Harleiana</i>, i. 153, 154.
OXFORD, advantages for learning, ii. 52;
  All Souls College, Shenstone's 'enemies in the gate,' i. 94, n. 5;
    its library the largest in Oxford except the Bodleian, ii. 35;
  a place for study for a man who has a mind to <i>prance</i>, ii. 67, n. 2;
  Angel Inn,
    Boswell and Johnson spend two evenings there, ii. 440, 449;
    Pitt (Earl of Chatham) hears treasonable songs, i. 271, n. 1;
  'Bacon's mansion,' iii. 357; v. 42;
  Balliol College, ii. 338, n. 2; v. 117, n. 4;
  balloon ascent, iv. 378;
  Beattie and Reynolds made Doctors of Law, v. 90, n. 1;
  Bocardo, Lydiat imprisoned in it, i. 194, n. 2;
  Bodleian, <i>Annals of the Bodleian</i>, iv. 161, n. 1;
    Blackstone's portrait, iv. 91, n. 2;
    Boswell presents MSS. to it, iii. 358, n. 1;
    closed one week in the year, iii. 367, n. 3;
    <i>Evelina</i>, iv. 223, n. 4;
    Johnson presents books to it, i. 274, n. 2, 302; ii. 279,  n. 5;
      a fragment of his Diary among the MSS., ii. 476;
    largest library in Oxford, ii. 35;
    <i>Recuyell of the historyes of Troye</i>, v. 459, n. 2;
    Welsh MS. on music, iii. 367;
  Bodley's Dome, iii. 357;
  Boswell's visits to Oxford: See BOSWELL, Oxford;
  Brasenose College, James Boswell, junior, a member of it, i. 15;
    Rev. Mr. Churton, a Fellow, iv. 212, n. 4;
    Johnson seen near its gate, iv. 300, n. 2;
    The Principal's advice,
    <i>Cave de resignationibus</i>, ii. 337, n. 4;
  Broadgates Hall,
    the ancient foundation of Pembroke College, i. 75, n. 3;
  Castle (prison),
    Wesley preaches to the prisoners, i. 459, n. 1;
  'caution' money, i. 58, n. 2;
  Chancellors, three of the House of Ormond, i. 281, n. 1;
    Earl of Westmoreland, i. 281, n. 1, 348, n. 2;
    Lord North, ii. 318, n. 1;
  Christ Church, Bateman, Rev. Mr., a Tutor, i. 76;
    bequest from Lord Orrery, v. 238, n. 5;
    Burton, Robert, elected student, i. 59;
    'Canons
      Sir, it is a great thing to dine with the Canons,' ii. 445;
      dinners lasted six hours, ib., n. 1;
    devotion of a studious man, i. 296, n. 3;
    Johnson mocked by the men, i. 77;
    Library, not so large as All Souls, ii. 35;
    a place for study for a man who has a mind to <i>prance</i>, ii. 67, n. 2;
    MSS. on music, iii. 366;
    Psalmanazar lodged there, iii. 445, 449;
    Smith, Edmund, a member, i. 75, n. 5;
      expelled, ii. 187, n. 3;
    Taylor enters by Johnson's advice, i. 76;
      confounded with another John Taylor, ib., n. 1;
    West describes it in 1736, i. 76, n. 1;
  Christ Church meadow, Johnson slides on the ice, i. 59, 272;
    walking on it without a band, iii. 13, n. 3;
  Clarendon Press,
    Johnson's advice about its management, ii. 424-6, 441;
    put under better regulations, ii. 35;
    printing <i>Polybius</i>, ib.;
      and King Alfred's will, iv. 133, n. 2;
  Coffee-house,
    Johnson is wanton and insolent to Sheridan, ii. 320; v. 360;
    advises Warton to snatch time from the coffee-house, i. 279;
  Colleges, their authority lessened, iii. 262;
    bequests to them, iii. 306;
  College joker, iv. 288;
  College servants, i. 271, n. 2;
  Commemoration of 1754, i. 146, n. 1;
  Common rooms, the students excluded from them, ii. 443;
    mentioned in Warton's <i>Progress of Discontent</i>, iii. 323, n, 4;
  condemnation-sermon, i. 273;
  degree conferred without examination, iii. 13, n. 3;
    an honorary degree, i. 278, n. 2;
  <i>Demy</i>, a scholar of Magdalen College, i. 61, n. 1.
  East Gate, i. 61, n. 3;
  education not by lectures, iv. 92;
  execution for forgery, i. 147, n. 1;
  Gaudies, i. 60, n. 4; ii. 445, n. 1;
  George I's troop of horse, i. 281, n. 1;
  Hastings's, Warren, projected institution, iv. 68, n. 2;
  High-street, Johnson standing astride the kennel, ii. 268, n. 2;
    walking along it without a band, iii. 13, n. 3;
  Iffley, iv. 295;
  ignorance of things necessary to life, ii. 52, n. 2;
    scholastic ignorance of mankind, ii. 425;
  indifference to literature, i. 275, n. 2;
  Jacobitism, i. 72, n. 3, 146, n. 1, 279, n. 5, 281, n. 1, 282, n. 3,
296, n. 1; ii. 443, n. 4;
  Jeffrey, Lord, an undergraduate, ii. 159, n. 6;
  Johnson elevated by approaching it, iv. 284;
    gives a toast among some grave men, ii. 478; iii. 200;
    neglected in his youth, i. 77, n. 4;
    receives the degree of M.A., i. 275, 278, n. 2, 280-283;
      of D.C.L., i. 488, n. 3; ii. 331-3;
    says he wished he had learnt to play at cards, iii. 23;
    (for his visits to Oxford, See iii. 450-3,
      and under many headings of this title);
  Kettel Hall, account of it, i. 289, n. 2;
    Johnson lodges in it, i. 270, n. 5;
  Lincoln College, Chambers, Robert, a member of it, i. 274, 336;
    Mortimer, Dr., the Rector, great at denying, ii. 268, n. 2;
    Wesley, John, a Tutor, i. 63, n. 1;
  <i>London</i>, effect produced by, i. 127;
  Magdalen Bridge, built by Gwynn, ii. 438, n. 3; v. 454, n. 2;
  Magdalen College,
    Addison elected a Demy, i. 61, n, 1;
    Gibbon, described by, ii. 443, n. 4; iii. 13, n. 3;
    Home, Dr., the President, mentioned, ii. 279;
      Boswell and Johnson drink tea with him, ii. 445;
    Warton, Thomas, senior, a fellow, i. 449, n. 1;
  Magdalen Hall, i. 336;
  <i>Manège</i> projected, ii. 424;
  Market built by Gwynn, v. 454, n. 2;
  Merton College,
    Boswell saunters in the walks, iv. 299;
    mentioned, ii. 438;
  Methodists,
    rise of the, i. 58, n. 3, 68, n. 1;
    expulsion of six, ii. 187;
  Murray, William (Earl of Mansfield), matriculates, ii. 194, n. 3;
  New Inn Hall,
    Boswell and Johnson visit it, ii. 46;
    Johnson walks in the Principal's garden, ii. 268, n. 2;
  <i>Olla Podrida</i>, iv. 426, n. 3;
  Oriel College,
    common-room filled on Gilbert White's visits, ii. 443, n. 4;
    Provost assisted to bed by his butler, ii. 445, n. 1;
  Oseney Abbey,
    Johnson views its ruins with indignation, i. 273;
     Paoli visits it, v. i, n. 3;
  Parker, Sackville, the bookseller, iv. 308;
  Parks, i. 279;
  Pembroke College,
    ale-house near the gate, iii. 304;
    Barton, Mr. A. T., Fellow and Tutor, v. 117, n. 4;
    blue-stocking party, iv. 151, n. 2;
    butler, i. 271;
    buttery-books, ii. 444, n. 3;
    Camden's Latin grace, v. 65, n. 2;
    caution-book, i. 58, n. 2;
    chapel, i. 59, n. 1;
    Common-room, Johnson's games at draughts, ii. 444;
      his portrait, iv. 151, n. 2;
    declamations, i. 71, n. 2;
    Edwards, Oliver, iii. 302-4, 306;
    eminent members, i. 75;
    gateway, i. 74; gaudy, i. 60, n. 4, 273, n. 2;
      Johnson enters, i. 58;
        leaves, i. 78;
        length of his residence, ib., n. 2;
      eulogium on it, i. 75, nn. 3 and 5;
      first exercise, i. 71; iv. 309;
      first visit in 1754, i. 271;
        and Boswell visit it in 1776, ii. 441;
        Johnson in 1782, iv. 151, n. 2;
        and Boswell in June, 1784, iv. 285; v. 357;
        last visit (Nov. 1784), iv. 376;
      'nowhere so happy,' ib., n. 2;
        'a frolicksome fellow,' i. 73;
      meets Dr. Price, iv. 238, n. 1, 434;
      neglected by the Master, i. 272;
      rooms, i. 72, 73, n. 1;
      shows it to Hannah More, i. 75, n. 5; iv. 151, n. 2;
    library, Johnson presents it with his <i>Works</i>, i. 74;
      Johnson's <i>Tracts</i>, ii. 315, n. 2;
      <i>Politian</i>, iv. 371, n. 2;
    Masters,
      Dr. Panting, i. 72;
      Dr. Radcliffe, i. 271;
      Dr. Adams: See under DR. ADAMS;
      life in the Master's house, iv. 305;
    <i>Manuscripts</i>, i. 79, n. 2, 90, n. 3; ii. 215, n. 2; iv. 84, n. 4,
94, n. 3, 376, n. 4;
    members in residence, i. 63, n. 1;
    'nest of singing birds,' i. 75; iv. 151, n. 2;
    November 5 kept with solemnity, i. 60;
    '<i>Pembrochienses voco ad certamen poeticum</i>, i. 75, n. 5;
    property bequeathed to it, iii. 306;
    residence, length of, i. 78, n. 2;
    Saturday weekly themes, i. 59, n. 3;
    sconces, i. 59, n. 3;
    servitors, i. 73, n. 4;
    weekly bills, i. 78, n. 1;
    Whitefield a servitor, i. 59, n. 3, 73, n. 4;
  population in 1789, iii. 450;
  post coach, Boswell, Johnson and Gwynn ride in it, ii. 438; iii. 129;
    Boswell and Johnson, iv. 283;
  'Prologue spoken before the Duke of York at Oxford,' ii. 465;
  Queen's College, Jacobite singing, i. 271, n. 1;
    Lancaster, Dr., the Provost, i. 61, n. 1;
  Radcliffe Library, opening, i. 279, n. 5;
    Wise, Francis, the librarian, i. 275, n. 4;
  Radcliffe's travelling-fellowships, iv. 293;
  residence required in 1781, iii. 13, n. 3;
  Rewley Abbey, Johnson views its ruins with indignation, i. 273;
  riding school projected, ii. 424;
  Secker's variation of 'Church and King,' iv. 29;
  Servitors, hunted, i. 73, n. 4;
    employed in transcription, i. 276;
    advantages of servitorships, v. 122;
  Sheldonian Theatre,
    Johnson present at the instalment of the Chancellor, i. 348, n. 2;
  St. Edmund's Hall, expulsion of  Methodists, ii. 187, n. 1;
  St. John's College,  Vicesimus Knox, iii. 13, n. 3;
  St. Mary's Church,
    Johnson joins there a grand procession, i. 348, n. 2;
    sermon on his death, iv. 422;
    Panting's, Dr., sermon, i. 72, n. 3;
    Whitefield receives the sacrament, i. 68, n. 1;
  St. Mary's Hall,
    Principals—Dr. King, i. 279, n. 5;
      Dr. Nowell, iv. 295;
    Story, the Quaker, describes the Undergraduates in 1731, i. 68, n. 1.
  Trinity College,
    Beauclerk, Topham, i. 248;
    Boswell and Johnson call on T. Warton, ii. 446;
    Johnson speaks of taking up his abode there, i. 272;
    gives Baskerville's <i>Virgil</i> to the library, ii. 67;
    Langton enters, i. 247, n. 1, 248;
    Presidents—Dr. Huddesford, i. 280, n. 2;
      Dr. Kettel, i. 289, n. 2;
    Walmsley, Gilbert, enters, i. 81, n. 2;
    Warton, Thomas, a Fellow, i. 270, n. 1;
    Wise, Francis, a Fellow, i. 275, n. 4;
  University College,
    Boswell and Johnson call there in 1776, ii. 440-1;
      dine on St. Cuthbert's Day, ii. 445;
      dine with the Master, iv. 308;
    chapel at six in the morning, ii. 381, n. 2;
    Common Room,
      Johnson's dispute in it with Dr. Mortimer, ii. 268, n. 2;
    his three bottles of port, iii. 245;
    his portrait, ii. 25, n. 2;
    inscription on it, iii. 245, n. 3;
    Coulson, Rev. Mr., v. 459, n. 4;
    Johnson seen there by a Welsh schoolmaster, v. 447;
    portraits of distinguished members, ii. 25, n. 2;
    Scott, William, tutor, iv. 92, n. 2;
    Wetherell, Dr., the Master: See under WETHERELL, Dr.;
  University, described by R. West in 1735, i. 76, n. 1;
    by Dr. Knox in 1781, iii. 13, n. 3; iv. 391, n. l;
    worst time about 1770, ii. 445, n. 1;
  University verses, ii. 371;
  Vacation, Long, i. 63, n. 1;
  Worcester College, Foote and Dr. Gower, ii. 95, n. 2.
OXFORDSHIRE, contested election of 1754, i. 282, n. 3.</p>

<h3>P.</h3>

<p>PACKWOOD, Warwickshire, i. 35, n. 1.
PADUA,
  Johnson has a mind to go to it, i. 73; iii. 453;
  Goldsmith went to it, i. 73, n. 2;
  mentioned, i. 322.
PAIN
  bodily pain easily supported, i. 157, n, 1;
  violent pain of mind must be severely felt, ii. 469.
PAINTERS, the reputation of, iii. 43, n. 4.
PAINTING,
  inferior to poetry, iv. 321;
  labour not disproportionate to effect, ii. 439;
  styles, iii. 280:
  See under JOHNSON, painting.
PALACES, ii. 393.
PALATINES, the, iii. 456.
PALESTINE, v. 334, n. 1.
PALEY, Archdeacon,
  attacks Gibbon, v. 203, n. 1;
  Bishop Law's love of parentheses, iii. 402, n. 1;
  on the right to the throne, v. 202-3.
PALMER, John, <i>Answer to Dr. Priestley</i>, iii. 291, n. 2.
PALMER, Miss, Sir Joshua Reynolds's niece, iv. 165, n. 4.
PALMER, Rev. T. F.,
  dines with Johnson, iv. 125;
  transported for sedition, i. 467, n. 1; iv. 125, n. 2.
<i>Palmerin of England</i>, i. 49, n. 2.
<i>Palmerino d' Inghilterra</i>, iii. 2.
PALMERSTON, second Viscount,
  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;
    black-balled, iv. 232;
    elected, ib., n. 2, 326;
  his respectable pedigree, i. 348, n. 5.
PALMERSTON, third Viscount (the Prime-Minister),
  birth, iv. 232, n. 2.
  subscribes to an annuity for Johnson's god-daughter, iv. 202, n. 1.
PALMYRA, iv. 126.
<i>Pamphlet</i>, defined, iii. 319.
PANCKOUCKE, i. 288.
PANDOUR, A., v. 60.
PANEGYRICS, iii. 155.
PANTHEON,
  account of it, ii. 169, n. 1;
  Boswell and Johnson visit it, ii. 166, 168.
PANTING, Rev. Dr. Matthew, i. 72.
'PANTING TIME,' iv. 25.
PANTOMIMES, i. 111, n. 2.
PAOLI, General,
  account of him, ii. 71;
  Auchinleck, Lord, described by, v. 382, n. 2;
  Beattie, Johnson and Wilkes, describes, iv. 101;
  Boswell, beautiful attention to, iii. 51, n. 3;
    dedicates his <i>Corsica</i> to him, ii. 1, n. 2; v. 1;
    describes, to Miss Burney, i. 6, n. 2;
    exact record of his sayings, ii. 434, n. 1;
    his guest in London, ii. 375, n. 4; iii. 35;
      visits him in Corsica, ii. 2, 4, n. 1;
    makes himself known to him, i. 404, n. 2;
    and the <i>omnia vanitas</i>, iv. 112, n. 3;
    repeats anecdotes to him, i. 432, n. 2;
    sends him some books, ii. 61;
    vows sobriety to him, ii. 436, n. 1;
  death kept out of sight, iii. 154;
  dinners at his house, ii. 165, 220, 260; iii. 34, 52, 276, 278, 324-331;
iv. 330
    (Johnson loves to dine with him, ib.);
  drinks to the great vagabond, iii. 411, n. 1;
  England, arrives in, ii. 71;
  Goldsmith, compliments, ii. 224;
  <i>Good-Natured Man</i>, mentioned in, ii. 45, n. 2;
  <i>Histoire de Pascal Paoli</i>, par Arrighi, ii. 3, n. 1;
  Homer, antiquity of, iii. 330;
  house in South Audley Street, iii. 392;
  infidelity, ii. 81, n. 1;
  Johnson's description of his port, ii. 82;
    funeral, at, iv. 419, n. 1;
    introduction to him, ii. 80, 404;
    voracious appetite, iv. 331;
  languages, knowledge of, ii. 81, n. 3;
  marriage, state of, ii. 165;
  Mediterranean a subject for a poem, iii. 36;
  melancholy, remedy for, ii. 423, n. 1;
  pension, ii. 71, n. 2;
  Scotland, visits, v. 22, n. 2, 382, n. 2;
  sense of touch, ii. 190;
  Stewart's mission to him, ii. 81, n. 1;
  subordination and the hangman, i. 408, n. 1;
  successful rebels and the arts, ii. 223;
  Tasso, repeats a stanza of, iii. 330;
  torture, uses, i. 467, n. 1;
  Wales, visits, v. 448, 449;
  Walpole's account of him, ii. 82; v. 1, n. 3;
  Warley Camp, visits, iii. 368;
  mentioned, ii. 377, n. 1; iii. 104, 282; iv. 326, 332.
<i>Papadendrion</i>, iii. 103.
PAPIER MACHÉ, v. 458.
PAPISTS. See ROMAN CATHOLICS.
<i>Papyrius Cursor</i>, iv. 322.
PARACELSUS, ii. 36, n. 1.
PARADISE, John,
  account of him, iv. 364, n. 2;
  Johnson and Priestley meet at his house, iv. 434;
  Johnson's letter to him, iv. 364;
  mentioned, i. 64; iii. 104, n. 5, 386; iv. 224, n. 2, 254, 272.
PARADISE, Peter, iv. 364, n. 2.
<i>Paradise Lost. See</i> MILTON.
PARENTAL TYRANNY, i. 346, n. 2; iii. 377.
PARENTHESES,
  a pound of them, iii. 402, n. 1;
  Johnson disapproves of their use, iv. 190.
PARIS AND SUBURBS,
  account of them in Johnson's Journal, ii. 389-99;
  Austin Nuns, ii. 392;
  <i>Avantcoureur</i>, ii. 398;
  Bastille, ii. 396;
  'beastliest town in the universe,' ii. 403, n. 1;
  beer and brewers, ii. 396;
  Benedictine friars, ii. 385, 390. 397, 399, 402; iii. 286; iv. 411;
  boulevards, ii. 393;
  chairs made of painted boards, ii. 395;
  chambre de question, ii. 393;
  Chatlois (Châtelet), Hôtel de, ii. 389, 390;
  Choisi, ii. 392;
  Colosseum, ii. 394;
  Conciergerie, ii. 392, n, 2;
  Court at Fontainebleau, ii. 394;
    its slovenliness, ii. 395;
    at Versailles, v. 276;
  Courts of Justice, ii. 391, 395;
  <i>École Militaire</i>, ii. 389, 402;
  <i>Enfans trouvés</i>, ii. 398;
  Fathers of the Oratory, ii. 389;
  fire first lighted on Oct. 27, ii. 397;
  foot-ways, ii. 394, n. 3;
  Gobelins, ii. 390; v. 107;
  Grand Chartreux, ii. 398;
  Grêve, ii. 396;
  Hebrides, in novelties inferior to the, ii. 387;
  horses and saddles, ii. 395;
  Hospitals, ii. 390;
  Johnson saw little society, ii. 385;
  killed, number of people, ii. 393;
  Library, King's, ii. 397;
  <i>London</i>, mentioned in, i. 119;
  looking-glass factory, ii. 396;
  Louvre, ii. 394;
  low Parisians described by Mrs. Piozzi, v. 106, n. 4;
  Luxembourg, ii. 398;
  mean people only walk, ii. 394;
  Meudon, ii. 397;
  Observatory, ii. 389;
  <i>Palais Bourbon</i>, ii. 393, 394;
  <i>Palais Marchand</i>, ii. 391, 393;
  <i>Palais Royal</i>, ii. 392;
  payments, ii. 393; 396, 398;
  <i>Place de Vendôme</i>, ii. 390;
  <i>Pont tournant</i>, ii. 392;
  revival of letters, iii. 254;
  roads near Paris empty, ii. 393;
  Sansterre's brewery, ii. 396;
  <i>Sellette</i>, ii. 392;
  sentimentalists, iii. 149, n. 2;
  Sevres, ii. 395, 397;
  shops, mean, ii. 402;
  sinking table, ii. 392;
  society, compared with London for, iii. 253;
  Sorbonne, ii. 397, 399; v. 406;
  St. Cloud, ii. 397;
  St. Denis, ii. 399;
  St. Eustatia, ii. 398;
  St. Germain, ii. 399;
  St. Roque, ii. 390;
  Sundays, ii. 394;
  <i>Tournelle</i>, ii. 393;
  Trianon, ii. 395;
  Tuilleries, ii. 392, 394; iv. 282, n. 2;
  University, i. 321, n. 6; v. 91, n. 1;
  <i>Valet de place</i>, ii. 398.
<i>Parisenus and Parismenus</i>, iv. 8, n. 3.
PARISH, co-extensive with the manor, ii. 243;
  compels men to find security for the maintenance of their family,
iii. 287;
  election of ministers, ii. 244;
  neglected ones, iii. 437.
PARISH-CLERKS, iv. 125.
PARKER, Chief Baron, i. 45, n. 4.
PARKER, John, of Browsholme, v. 431.
PARKER, Sackville, the Oxford book-seller, iv. 308.
PARLIAMENT, awed the press, i. 115;
  corruption alleged, iii. 206;
  crown influence, ii. 118;
  debates: See DEBATES;
  disadvantages of a seat, iv. 220;
  dissolution: See under HOUSE OF COMMONS;
  duration immaterial, ii. 73;
    bill for shortening it,<i> ib., n</i>. 2; iii. 460;
  duration of parliaments from 1714 to 1773, v. 102, n. 2;
  governing by parliamentary corruption, ii. 117;
  Highlander's notion of one, v. 193;
  Houses of Commons and of Lords: See under HOUSE OF COMMONS
    and HOUSE OF LORDS;
  Johnson projects an historical account, i. 155;
    suggested as a member, ii. 136-9;
  larger council, a, ii. 355;
  Long Parliament, ii. 118;
  members free from arrest by a bailiff, iv. 391, n. 2;
  Pitt's motion for reform, iv. 165, n. 1;
  speakers and places, iv. 223;
  speeches, effect produced by, iii. 233-5;
  upstarts getting into it, ii. 339;
  use of it, ii. 355.
<i>Parliamentary History</i>, Johnson's <i>Debates</i>, i. 503, 508;
  prosecution of Whitehead and Dodsley, i. 125, n. 3.
<i>Parliamentary Journals</i>, i. 117.
PARLOUR, company for the, ii. 120, n. 1.
PARNELL, Rev. Dr. Thomas, Contentment, iii. 122, n. 2;
  drank too freely, iii. 155; iv. 54, n. 1, 398;
  Goldsmith writes his <i>Life</i>, ii. 166;
  <i>Hermit</i>, a disputed passage in his, iii. 220, 392-3;
  Johnson writes his epitaph, iv. 54; v. 404;
    and his <i>Life</i>, iv. 54;
  Milton, compared with, v. 434;
  <i>Night Piece</i>, ii. 328, n. 2.
PARODIES, Johnson's parodies of ballads, ii. 136, n. 4, 212, n. 4;
  parodies of Johnson: See under JOHNSON, style.
PARR, Rev. Dr. Samuel,
  describes himself as the second Grecian in England, iv. 385, n. 2;
  Johnson, argues with, iv. 15;
    character, describes, iv. 47, n. 2;
    epitaph, writes, iv. 423-4,444-6;
    <i>Life</i>, thinks of writing, iv. 443;
    Latin scholarship, praises, iv. 385, n. 3;
    reputation, defends, iv. 423;
    writes him a letter of recommendation, iv. 15, n. 5;
  neglected at Cambridge, i. 77, n. 4;
  Priestley, defends, iv. 238, n. 1, 434;
  Romilly, letter to, iv. 15, n. 5;
  Sheridan's system of oratory, i. 394, n. 2;
  Steevens, character of, iii. 281, n. 3;
  <i>Tracts by Warburton</i>, &amp;c., iv. 47, n. 2;
  White's <i>Bampton Lectures</i>, iv. 443.
PARRHASIUS, iv. 104, n. 2.
PARSIMONY, quagmire of it, iii. 348;
  timorous, iv. 154;
  wretchedness, iii. 317.
PARSON, the life of a. See CLERGYMEN.
PARSONS, the impostor in the Cock Lane Ghost, i. 406, n. 3.
PARTNEY, ii. 17.
PARTY, Burke's definition, ii. 223, n. 1;
  sticking to party, ii. 223; v. 36.
PASCAL, Johnson gives Boswell <i>Les Pensees</i>, iii. 380;
  read by Hannah More, iv. 88, n. 1.
<i>Passenger</i>, iv. 85, n. 1.
PASSION-WEEK. See JOHNSON, Passion-week.
PASSIONS, purged by tragedy, iii. 39.
<i>Pastern</i>, defined, i. 293, 378.
<i>Pastor Fido</i>, iii. 346.
PATAGONIA, v. 387.
<i>Pater Noster</i>, the, v. 121.
PATERNITY, its rights lessened, iii. 262.
PATERSON, Samuel, ii. 175; iii. 90; iv. 269, n. 1.
PATERSON, a student of painting, iii. 90; iv. 227, n. 3, 269.
<i>Paterson against Alexander</i>, ii. 373.
PATRICK, Bishop, iii. 58.
<i>Patriot, The</i>, by Johnson, account of it, ii. 286, 288;
  written on a Saturday, i. 373, n. 2;
  election-committees described, iv. 74, n. 3.
<i>Patriot, The</i>, a tragedy by J. Simpson, iii. 28.
<i>Patriot King</i>, i. 329, n. 3.
PATRIOTISM, last refuge of a scoundrel, ii. 348.
PATRIOTS, defined, iv. 87, n, 2;
  Dilly's 'patriotic friends,' iii. 66, 68;
  'don't let them be patriots,' iv. 87;
  patriotic groans, iii. 78.
PATRONAGE, Church, ii. 242-6;
  rights of patrons, ii. 149.
PATRONS, of authors, iv. 172;
  defined, i. 264, n. 4;
  harmful to learning, v. 59;
  mentioned in
    the <i>Rambler</i>, i. 259, n. 4;
    <i>Letter to Chesterfield</i>, i. 262;
    <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>, i. 264.
PATTEN, Dr., iv. 162.
PATTISON, Mark, General Oglethorpe, i. 127, n. 4;
  Oxford in 1770, ii. 445, n. 1;
  Bishop Warburton, v. 81, n. 1.
PAUL, Father. See SARPI.
PAUL, Sir G.O., v. 322, n. 1.
PAUSANIAS, v. 220.
PAVIA, ii. 125, n. 5.
PAYNE, Mr. E.J., defends Burke's character, iii. 46, n. 1;
  describes his love of Virgil, iii. 193, n. 3.
PAYNE, John, account of him, i. 317, n. 1;
  Ivy Lane Club, member of the, iv. 435;
  Johnson's friend in 1752, i. 243;
  publishes the first numbers of <i>The Idler</i>, i. 330, n. 3;
  mentioned, iv. 369, n. 3.
PAYNE, William, i. 317.
PEARCE, Zachary, Bishop of Rochester,
  Johnson, sends etymologies to, i. 292; iii. 112;
    writes the dedication to his posthumous works, iii. 113;
  wishes to resign his bishopric, iii. 113, n. 2;
  mentioned, i. 135.
PEARSON, John, Bishop of Chester,
  edits Hales's <i>Golden Remains</i>, iv. 315, n. 2;
  Johnson recommends his works, i. 398.
PEARSON, Rev. Mr., ii. 471; iv. 142, 256.
PEATLING, i. 241, n. 2.
PEERS, creations by Pitt, iv. 249, n. 4;
  influence in the House of Commons, v. 56;
  interference in elections, iv. 248, 250;
  judges, as, iii. 346;
  Temple's proposed reform, ii. 421.
  See HOUSE OF LORDS.
PEKIN, v. 305.
PELEW ISLANDS, v. 276, n. 2.
PELHAM, Fanny, iii. 139, n. 4.
PELHAM, Right Hon. Henry, Garrick's <i>Ode on his Death</i>, i. 269;
  pensions Guthrie, i. 117, n. 2;
  Whiggism under him and his brother, ii. 117.
PELISSON, i. 90, n. 1.
PELLET, Dr., iii. 349.
PEMBROKE, eighth Earl of,
  'lover of stone dolls,' ii. 439, n. 1.
PEMBROKE, tenth Earl of,
  Boswell visits him, ii. 371; iii. 122, n. 2;
  Johnson's <i>bow-wow</i> way, describes, ii. 326, n. 5; v. 18, n. 1;
  author of <i>Military Equitation</i>, v. 131.
PENANCE in churches, v. 208.
PENELOPE, v. 85.
PENGUIN, v. 225.
PENITENCE, gloomy, iii. 27.
PENN, Governor Richard, iii. 435, n. 4.
PENNANT, Thomas, Bâch y Graig, v. 436, n. 3;
  bears, ii. 347;
  Bolt Court and Johnson, mentions in his <i>London</i>, iii. 274-5;
  Fort George described, v. 124;
  rents racked in the Hebrides, v. 221, n. 3;
  <i>Tour in Scotland</i>,
    praised by Johnson, iii. 128, 271, 274, 278, v. 221;
    censured by Percy, iii. 272;
      and Boswell, iii. 274; v. 222;
  Voltaire, visits, i. 435, n. 1;
  a Whig, iii. 274-5; v. 157.
PENNINGTON, Colonel, v. 125, 127.
PENNY-POST. See POST.
PENRITH, ii. 4, n. 1; v. 113, n. 1.
<i>Pensioner</i>, defined, i. 294, n. 7, 374-5.
PENSIONS, defined, i. 294, 374-5;
  French authors, given to, i. 372, n. 1;
  George III's system, ii. 112;
  Johnson, conferred on, i. 372-7;
  not for life, i. 376, n. 2; ii. 317;
  nor for future services, i. 373, n. 2, 374; ii. 317;
  not increased after his <i>Pamphlets</i>, ii. 147, 317;
  proposed addition, iv. 326-8, 336-9, 348-50; 367-8;
    attacked, i. 142, 373, 429; ii. 112; iii. 64, n. 2; iv. 116;
      in parliament, iv. 318;
    Beauclerk's quotation in reference to it, i. 250;
    effect of it on Johnson's work, i. 372, n. 1;
      on his travelling, iii. 450;
    effect had it been granted earlier, iv. 27;
    entry in the Exchequer Order Book, i. 376, n. 2;
      'out of the usual course,' iv. 116;
    Johnson unchanged by it, i. 429;
  Strahan his agent in receiving it, ii. 137.
PENURIOUS GENTLEMAN, a, iii. 40.
PEOPLE, the judges afraid of the, v. 57.
PEPYS, Sir Lucas, iv. 63, 169, 228.
PEPYS, Samuel, Lord Orrery's plays, v. 237, n. 4;
  Spring Garden, iv. 26, n. 1;
  tea, i. 313, n. 2.
PEPYS, William Weller, <i>account of him</i>, iv. 82, n. 1;
  Johnson, attacked by, iv. 65, n. 1;
  over-praised by Mrs. Thrale, iv. 82;
  attacked again, iv. 159, n. 3;
  mentioned, ii. 228, n. 1; iii. 425.
<i>Perce-forest</i>, iii. 274, n. 1.
PERCEVAL, Lord (second Earl of Egmont), i. 508; iv. 198, n. 3.
PERCEVAL, Lady Catharine, v. 449, n. 1.
PERCY, Earl, iii. 142, 276-7.
PERCY, Dr. Thomas, Dean of Carlisle,
  afterwards Bishop of Dromore, Alnwick, at, ii. 142;
  anecdotes, full of, v. 255;
  Boswell, letter to, i. 74;
  Dean of Carlisle, made, iii. 365;
    'very <i>populous</i>' there, iii. 416, 417;
  death, on parting with his books in, iii. 312;
  dinner at his house, iii. 271;
  Dyer, Samuel, describes, iv. 11, n. 1;
  Easton Maudit, rector of, i. 486; iii. 437;
  Goldsmith and the Duchess of Northumberland, ii. 337, n. 1;
    epitaph, settles the dates in, iii. 81;
    lodgings, i. 350, n. 3;
    quarrels with, iii. 276, n. 2;
    visionary project, iv. 22, n. 3;
  Grainger's character,
    draws, ii. 454, n. 1;
    reviews his <i>Sugar-cane</i>, i. 481;
      admires it, ii. 454, n. 2;
  '<i>Grey Rat, the History of the</i>' ii. 455;
  Hawkins, draws the character of, i. 28, n. 1;
  heir male of the ancient Percies, iii. 271;
  <i>Hermit of Warkworth</i>, ii. 136;
  Johnson attacks him
    about Dr. Mounsey, ii. 64;
    about Percy's calling him short-sighted, iii. 271-3;
      Percy's uneasiness, iii. 275;
    Boswell's friendly scheme, iii. 276-8;
      at variance for the third time iii. 276 n. 2;
    conversation, iii. 317;
    first visit to Goldsmith, i. 366, n. 1;
    Garrick's awe and ridicule of, i. 99, n. 1;
    method in writing his <i>Dictionary</i>, i. 188, n. 2;
    parodies his poems, ii. 136, n. 4; 212, n. 4;
    praises him in a letter to Boswell, iii. 276, 278;
    projected <i>Life of Goldsmith</i>, iii. 100, n. 1;
    questions his daughter about <i>Pilgrim's Progress</i>, ii. 238, n. 5;
    serves him in his <i>Ancient Ballads</i>, iii. 276, n. 2;
    visits him, i. 49, 486;
    <i>Vision of Theodore</i>, i. 192;
  Levett, account of, iii. 220, n. 1;
  Literary Club, member of the, i. 478, n. 2, 479;
  loses by a fire, iii. 420;
  neglected parishes, iii. 437;
  Newport School, at, i. 50, n. 2;
  <i>Northern Antiquities</i>, iii. 274;
  Pennant, attacks, iii. 272;
  professor in the imaginary college, v. 109;
  <i>Reliques</i>, quoted, iv. 307, n. 3;
  <i>Spectator</i>, projects an edition of the, ii. 212, n. 1;
  wolf, is writing the history of the, ii. 455;
  mentioned, i. 142,  319, n. 3; ii. 63, 3l8, 375. n. 2; iii. 256;
iv. 98, 344, 402, n. 2.
<i>Peregrinity</i>, v. 130.
PERFECTION, to be aimed at, iv. 338.
PERIODICAL BLEEDING, iii. 152.
PERKINS, Mr.. Account of him, ii. 286, n. 1;
  Johnson's letters to him. See JOHNSON, letters;
    likeness in his counting-house, ii. 286, n. 1;
  manager of Thrale's brewery, iv. 80, 85, n. 2;
  mountebanks, on, iv. 83;
  mentioned, iv. 245, n. 2, 402, n. 2.
PERKS, Thomas, i. 95, n. 3.
PERREAU, the brothers, ii. 450, n. 1.
PERSECUTION, the test of religious truth, ii. 250; iv. 12.
PERSECUTIONS, The Ten, ii. 255.
PERSEVERANCE, i. 399.
PERSIAN EMPIRE, iii. 36.
<i>Persian Heroine, The</i>, iv. 437.
PERSIAN LANGUAGE, iv. 68.
<i>Persian Letters</i>, i. 74, n. 2.
PERSIUS, quotations, <i>Sat</i>. i. 7, iv. 27, n. 6;
  <i>Sat</i>. i. 27, v. 25, n. 2.
PERSONAGE, a great, i. 219; v. 125, n. 1.
PERTH, Duke of, Chancellor of Scotland, iii. 227.
PERUVIAN BARK, i. 368; iv. 293.
PETER THE GREAT, worked in a dockyard, v. 249.
PETER PAMPHLET, i. 287, n. 3.
<i>Peter Pindar</i>, v. 415, n. 4.
PETERBOROUGH, Charles Mordaunt, Earl of, iv. 333.
PETERS, Mr., Dr. Taylor's butler, ii. 474.
PETHER or PEFFER, an engraver, iii. 21, n. 1.
PETITIONS, Dodd's case, iii. 120;
  how got up, ii. 90, n. 5;
  Johnson on petitioning, ii. 90; iii. 120, 146;
  Middlesex election, ii. 103;
  mode of distressing government, ii. 90.
PETRARCH,
  <i>Aeglogues</i>, i. 277, n. 2;
  read by Johnson, i. 57, 115, n. 2; iv. 374, n. 5.
PETTY, Sir William,
  allowance for one man, i. 440;
  employment of the poor, iv. 3;
  <i>Quantulumcunque</i>, i. 440, n. 2.
PETWORTH, iv. 160.
PEYNE, Mr., of Pembroke College, i. 60, n. 5.
PEYTON, Mr.,
  Johnson's amanuensis, i. 187; ii. 155;
  death, ii. 379, n. 1.
PHAEAX, iii. 267, n. 4.
PHALLICK MYSTERY, iii. 239.
PHARAOH, ii. 150.
PHARMACY, simpler than formerly, iii. 285.
PHILIDOR, the musician, iii. 373.
<i>Philip II, History of</i>, by Watson, v. 58.
PHILIPPS, Sir Erasmus, <i>Diary</i>, i. 60, n. 4, 273, n. 2.
PHILIPPS, Sir John, v. 276.
PHILIPPS, Lady, v. 276.
PHILIPS, Ambrose,
  Blackmore's <i>Creation</i>, describes the composition of, ii. 108, n. 1;
  <i>Distressed Mother</i>, i. 181, n. 4;
  <i>Life</i> by Johnson, iv. 56;
  <i>Namby Pamby</i>, called by Pope, i. 179, n. 4;
  'seems a wit,' i. 318, n. 4;
  mentioned, iii. 427.
PHILIPS, C. C., a musician, his epitaph, i. 148; ii. 25; v. 348.
PHILIPS, John, <i>Cyder</i>, a poem, v. 78.
PHILIPS, Miss (Mrs. Crouch), iv. 227.
PHILIPS, Mr., one of Johnson's old friends, iv. 227.
PHILOSOPHERS,
  ancient philosophers disputed with good humour, iii. 100;
  Edwards tries to be one, iii. 305;
    also White, ib., n. 2;
  French philosophers, ib.
PHILOSOPHICAL NECESSITY, iii. 291, n. 2.
PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, iv. 36, n. 4.
<i>Philosophical Survey of the South of Ireland</i>, ii. 339; iv. 320, n. 4.
<i>Philosophical Transactions</i>, i. 309; ii. 40, n. 2.
PHILOSOPHICAL WISE MAN, ii. 475.
PHIPPS, Captain, v. 236, 392, n. 6.
PHOCYLIDIS, v. 445.
PHOENICIAN LANGUAGE, iv. 195.
PHYSIC,
  a science and trade, iii. 22, n. 4;
  irregular practisers in it, iii. 389:
  See under JOHNSON, physic.
PHYSICIAN,
  a foppish one, iv. 319;
  history of an unfortunate one, ii. 455;
  one recommended by Dr. Taylor, ii. 474;
  one not sober for twenty years, iii. 389;
  one who lost his practice by changing his religion, ii. 466.
PHYSICIANS,
  ancients failed, moderns succeeded, iii. 22, n. 4;
  bag-wigs, wore, iii. 288;
  <i>Fortune of Physicians</i>, i. 242, n. 1;
  Hogarth's pictures of one, iii. 288, n. 4;
  intruders, do not love, ii. 331, n. 1;
  Johnson celebrates their beneficence, iv. 263;
    has pleasure in their company, iv. 293;
    esteems them, v. 183;
    his conversation compared to the practice of one, ii. 15;
  title: See under DR. MEMIS.
PIAZZAS, v. 115.
PICKLES, ii. 219.
<i>Pickwick</i>, story of the man who ate crumpets, iii. 384, n. 4.
PIERESC, his death and papers, ii. 371.
PIETY,
  comparative piety of women and wicked fellows, iv. 289;
  crazy piety, ii. 473.
<i>Piety in Pattens</i>, ii. 48, n. 1.
PIG, a learned, iv. 373.
<i>Pilgrim's Progress</i>,
  Fearing and the screen, i. 163, n. 1;
  Fearing and death, iv. 417, n. 2;
  Johnson praises it highly, ii. 238;
    wishes it longer, i. 71, n. 1.
PILING ARMS, iii. 355.
PILKINGTON, James,
  <i>Present State of Derbyshire</i>, iii. 161, n. 2.
PILLORY, how far it dishonours, iii. 315;
  'a place or the pillory,' iv. 113, n. 1;
  Parsons of the Cock Lane Ghost set in it, i. 406, n. 3.
<i>Pindar</i>, Johnson asks Boswell to get him a copy, ii. 202;
  receives it, ii. 205;
  West's translation, iv. 28.
PINK, Dr., i. 194, n. 2.
PINKERTON, John, iv. 330.
PINO, ii. 451, n. 3.
PIOZZI, Signor, account of him, iv. 339, n. 2;
  attacked by Baretti, iii. 49, n. 1;
  Thrale, Mrs., attached to him, iv. 158, n. 4;
    marries him, ii. 328, n. 4; iv. 339.
PIOZZI, Mrs. See THRALE, Mrs.
<i>Piozzi Letters</i>.
  See under MRS. THRALE, Johnson's letters to her.
<i>Pit</i>, to, iii. 185.
PITCAIRNE, Archibald, v. 58.
PITT, William. See Chatham, Earl of.
PITT, William, the son,
  Boswell, neglects, iii. 213, n. 1, 464; iv. 261, n. 3;
    letter to him, iv. 261, n. 3;
      his answer, ib.;
  called to order, iv. 297, n. 2;
  Fox a political apostate, calls, iv. 297, n. 2;
    compared with, iv. 292;
  honesty of mankind, on the, iii. 236, n. 3;
  Johnson's pension, proposed addition to, iv. 350, n. 1;
  Macaulay, attacked by, ib.;
  ministry, his, iv. 165, n. 3, 170, n. 1, 264, n. 2;
  motion for reform of parliament, iv. 165, n. 1;
  tax on horses, v. 51.
PITTS, Rev. John, iv. 181, n. 3.
PITY, not natural to man, i. 437.
PLACE-HUNTERS, iii. 234.
PLACES OF PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT, v. 295, n. 2.
PLAGUE OF LONDON, Dr. Hodges, ii. 341, n. 3.
PLAIDS, v. 85.
<i>Plain Dealer</i>, i. 156, 173, n. 3, 174.
<i>Plan of the Dictionary</i>. See <i>Dictionary</i>.
PLANTA, Joseph, ii. 399, n. 2.
PLANTATIONS (settlements), ii. 12.
PLANTERS. See AMERICA, planters.
PLANTING TREES, Johnson recommends, iii. 207.
  See SCOTLAND, trees.
PLASSEY, Battle of, v. 124, n. 2.
PLAUTUS, quoted, i. 467, n. 2.
PLAXTON, Rev. G., i. 36, n. 2.
PLAYERS, action of all tragic players is bad, v. 38;
  below ballad-singers, iii. 184;
  Camden's, Lord, familiarity with Garrick, iii. 311;
  change in their manners, i. 168;
  Churchill's lines on them, i. 168, n. 1;
  Collier's censure, i. 167, n. 2;
  dancing-dogs, like, ii. 404;
  declamation too measured, ii. 92, n. 4;
  drinking tea with a player, v. 46;
  emphasis wrong, i. 168;
  'fellow who claps a hump on his back,' iii. 184;
  'fellow who exhibits himself for a shilling,' ii. 234;
  Johnson's prejudice against them shown in the <i>Life of Savage</i>, i. 167;
  <i>Life of Dryden</i>, ib., n. 2;
    more favourable judgment, i. 201; iv. 244, n. 2;
  lawyers, compared with, ii. 235;
  past compared with present, v. 126;
  Puritans, abhorred by, i. 168, n. 1;
  Reynolds defends them, ii. 234;
  transformation into characters, iv. 243-4;
  Whitehead's compliment to Garrick, i. 402.
  See GARRICK, profession.
PLEASED WITH ONESELF, iii. 328.
PLEASING, negative qualities please more than positive, iii. 149.
PLEASURE, aim of all our ingenuity, iii. 282;
  happiness, compared with, iii. 246;
  harmless pleasure, iii. 388;
  monastic theory of it, iii. 292;
    in itself a good, iii. 327;
  no man a hypocrite in it, iv. 316;
  partakers in it, iii. 328;
  'public pleasures counterfeit,' iv. 316, n. 2.
<i>Pleasures of the Imagination</i>. See AKENSIDE, MARK.
<i>Pledging oneself</i>, iii. 196.
PLINY, v. 220.
PLOTT, Robert, <i>History of Staffordshire</i>, iii. 187.
PLOWDEN, iv. 310.
<i>Plum</i>, defined, iii. 292, n. 2.
PLUNKET, W. C. (afterwards Lord), ii. 366, n. 2.
PLUTARCH, <i>Alcibiades</i> quoted, iii. 267, n. 4;
  apophthegms and <i>memorabilia</i>, v. 414;
  biography, i. 31;
  Euphranor and Parrhasius, iv. 104, n. 2;
  Monboddo follows him in the approval of slavery, v. 77, n. 2;
  <i>Solon</i> quoted, iii. 255.
PLYMOUTH, French ships of war in sight, iii. 326, n. 5;
  Johnson visits it, i. 377;
    hates a 'docker,' i. 379;
  mentioned, iv. 77.
PLYMPTON, iv. 432.
POCOCK, Dr. Edward, the Orientalist, iii. 269, n. 3; iv. 28.
POCOCK, Mr., catalogue of sale of autographs, ii. 297, n. 2.
POCOCKE, Richard, <i>Travels</i>, ii. 346.
POEMS, preserved by tradition, ii. 347;
  temporary ones, iii. 318.
POET-LAUREATES, i. 185, n. 1.
<i>Poetical Calendar</i>, i. 382.
<i>Poetical Review of the Literary and Moral Character of Dr. Johnson</i>.
  See COURTENAY, John.
POETRY, devotional, iii. 358, n. 3; iv. 39;
  mediocrity in it, ii. 351;
  modern imitators of the early poets, ii. 136, 212; iii. 158-160;
  translated, cannot be, iii. 36, 257;
  what is poetry? iii. 38.
POETS, collection of all the English poets proposed, iii. 158;
  English divided into four classes, i. 448, n. 2;
  fundamental principles, knowledge of, iii. 347;
  preserve languages, iii. 36;
  rarity, their, v. 86.
<i>Poets, Lives of the</i>. See <i>Lives of the Poets</i>.
<i>Poets, The</i>, Apollo Press edition, iii. 118.
POKER CLUB, ii, 376, n. 1, 431, n. 1.
POLAND, hospitality to strangers, iv. 18;
  Johnson wishes to visit it, iii. 456.
<i>Polemo-middinia</i>, iii. 284.
<i>Polite Philosopher, The</i>, iii. 22.
POLITENESS, 'fictitious benevolence,' v. 82;
  its universal axiom, v. 82, n. 2.
<i>Politian</i>, i. 90; iv. 371, n. 2.
<i>Political Conferences</i>, iii. 309.
POLITICAL IMPROVEMENT, schemes of, ii. 102.
<i>Political Survey of Great Britain</i>, ii. 447.
<i>Political Tracts by the Author of the Rambler</i>, ii. 315;
  copy in Pembroke College, ib., n. 2;
    attacked, ii. 315-317;
  preface to it suggested, ii. 441.
POLITICS, modern, devoid of all principle, ii. 369;
  in the seventeenth century, ii. 369.
'POLL,' Miss Carmichael, iii. 368.
<i>Polluted</i>, iv. 402, n. 2.
POLYBIUS, ii. 35.
POLYGAMY, v. 209, 217.
POLYPHEME, i. 278.
POLYPHEMUS, v. 82, n. 4.
POMFRET, John, Johnson adds him to the <i>Lives</i>, iii. 370;
  his <i>Choice</i>, ib., n. 7.
<i>Pomponius Mela de situ Orbis</i>, i. 465.
<i>Pomposo</i>, i. 406.
PONDICHERRY, v. 124, n. 2.
PONSONBY, Hon. Mr., v. 263.
POOR, cannot agree, ii. 103;
  condition of them the national distinction, ii. 130;
  deaths from hunger in London, iii. 401;
  education, ii. 188, n. 6: See under STATE;
  employment under the poor-law, iv. 3;
  France, in, ii. 390;
  'honour, have no,' iii. 189;
  injured by indiscriminate hospitality, iv. 18;
  provision for them, ii. 130;
  rich, at the mercy of the, v. 304;
  superfluous meat for them, v. 204.
POPE, Alexander, Addison's 'familiar day,' iv. 91, n. 1;
  Adrian's lines, translation of, iii. 420, n. 2;
  <i>Beggar's Opera</i>, his expectation about the, ii. 369, n. 1;
  Benson's monument to Milton, v. 95, n. 2;
  Blair, anecdotes of him by, iii. 402-3;
  bleeding, advised to try, iii. 152, n. 3;
  Blount, Martha, i. 232, n. 1.
  Bolingbroke's present to Booth, v. 126, n. 2;
  Bolingbroke's enmity, i. 329;
  Bolingbroke, Lady, described by, iii. 324;
  'borrows for want of genius,' v. 92, n. 4;
  Budgell, Eustace, ii. 229, n. 1;
  <i>Characters of Men and Women</i>, ii. 84;
  Cibber's <i>Careless Husband</i>, ii. 340, n. 4; iii. 72, n. 4;
  condensing sense, art of, v. 345;
  confidence in himself, i. 186, n. 1;
  Congreve, dedicates the <i>Iliad</i> to, iv. 50, n. 4;
  conversation, iii. 392, n. 1; iv. 49;
  Cooke, correspondence with, v. 37, n. 1;
  Cowley out of fashion, iv. 102, n. 2;
  Crousaz's <i>Examen</i>, i. 137;
  death, reflection on the day of his, iii. 165;
  his death imputed to a saucepan, i. 269, n. 1;
  death-bed confession, v. 175, n. 5;
  Dodsley, assisted, ii. 446, n. 4;
  Dryden, distinguished from, ii. 5, 85;
  in his boyhood saw him, i. 377; n. 1;
  <i>Dunciad</i>, annotators, its, iv. 306, n. 3;
    concluding lines, ii. 84;
    Dennis's thunder, iii. 40, n. 2;
    resentment of those attacked, ii. 61, n. 4;
    written for fame, ii. 334;
  <i>Dying Christian to his Soul</i>, iii. 29;
  <i>Elegy to the memory of an unfortunate Lady</i>, i. 173 n. 2;
  epigram on Lord Stanhope attributed to him, iv. 102, n. 4;
  <i>Epitaph on Mrs. Corbet</i>, iv. 235, n. 2;
  <i>Epitaphs</i>, Johnson's Dissertation on his, i. 335;
  <i>Essay on Criticism</i>, ii. 36, n. 1; iv. 217, n. 4;
  <i>Essay on Man</i>, Bolingbroke's share in it, iii. 402-3;
    Warburton's comments, ii. 37, n. 1;
  fame, his, said to have declined, ii. 84; iii. 332;
  female-cousin, his, iii. 71, n. 5;
  Fermor, Mrs., describes him, ii. 392;
  Flatman, borrowed from, iii. 29;
  friends, his, iii. 347; iv. 50;
  gentlemen, on the ignorance of, iv. 217, n. 4;
  Goldsmith's reflection on his 'strain of pride,' iii. 165, n. 3;
  Greek, knowledge of, iii. 403;
  grotto, his, iv. 9; verses on it, iv. 51;
  happy, says that he is, iii. 251;
  Homer, his, attacked by Bentley, iii. 256, n. 4;
      and Cowper, iii. 257, n. 1;
    praised by Johnson, iii. 257;
      and Gray, ib., n. 1;
    his pretended reason for translating it into blank verse,
ii. 124, n. 1;
    written on the covers of letters, i. 143, n. 1;
  <i>Iliad</i>, written slowly, i. 319, n. 3;
  <i>Odyssey</i>, translated by the help of associates, iv. 49;
  imitations, fondness for, i. 118, n. 5;
  intimidated by prosecution of P. Whitehead, i. 125, n. 3;
  Johnson criticises his <i>Ode on St. Cecilia's Day</i>, iv. 16, n. 4;
    defends him as a poet, iv. 46;
    <i>Dictionary</i>, apparently interested in, i. 182;
    estimate of the <i>Dunciad</i>, ii. 84, n. 4;
    recommends, to Lord Gower, i. 132, n. 1, 133, 143;
      to J. Richardson, ib.;
    translates his <i>Messiah</i>, i. 61, 272;
    'will soon be déterré,' i. 129; ii. 85;
    writes his <i>Life</i>, iv. 46-7;
  labour his pleasure, ii. 99, n. 1;
  laugh, did not, ii. 378, n. 2;
  Lewis's verses to him, iv. 307;
  Lintot, quarrels with, i. 435, n. 4;
  Lords, gave all his friendship to, iii. 347;
  'low-born Allen,' v. 80, n. 5;
  Mallet paid to attack his memory, i. 329;
  'Man never is but always to be blest' ii. 350;
  Marchmont's, Earl of, anecdotes of him, iii. 342-5, 392, 418;
    Pope's executor, iv. 51;
  <i>Memoirs of Scriblerus</i>, v. 44, n. 4;
  mill, his mind a, v. 265;
  <i>Miscellanies</i>, transplants an indecent piece into his, iv. 36, n. 4;
    lines applicable to Gibbon, ii. 133, n. 1;
  'modest Foster,' iv. 9;
  monument proposed in St. Paul's, ii. 239;
  'narrow man, a,' ii. 271, n. 2;
  'nodded in company,' iii. 392, n. 1;
  pamphlets against him, kept the, iv. 127;
  'paper-sparing,' i. 142;
  papers left at his death, iv. 51, n. 1;
  parents, behaviour to his, i. 339, n. 3;
  parodied by I.H. Browne, ii. 339, n. 1;
  parsimony, i. 143, n. 1;
  <i>Pastorals</i>, ii. 84;
  <i>Patriot King</i>, clandestinely printed copies of the, i. 329, n. 3;
  pensioners, satirises, i. 375;
  Philips, Ambrose, attacks, i. 179, n. 4;
  pleasure in writing, iv. 219, n. 1;
  Prendergast and Sir John Friend, ii. 183;
  priests where a monkey is the god, ii. 135, n. 1;
  Prince of Wales, repartee to the, iv. 50;
  Radcliffe's doctors, iv. 293, n. 1;
  <i>Rape of the Lock</i>, ii. 392, n. 8;
    reading, his, i. 57, n. 1; ii. 36, n. 1;
    of the modern Latin poets, i. 90, n. 2;
  Rich, anecdote of, iv. 246, n. 5;
  Ruffhead's <i>Life of Pope</i>, ii. 166;
  Settle, the City Poet, iii. 76, n. 1;
  <i>Seventeen hundred and thirty-eight</i>, i. 125, n. 3, 126, 127, n. 3;
  Shakespeare, edition of, v. 244, n. 2;
  Spence at Oxford, visits, iv. 9;
  Steele, letter to, iii. 165, n. 3;
  Swift, his prudent management for, iii. 20, n. 1;
  Swift's letter on parting with him, iii. 312;
  Theobald, revenge on, ii. 334, n. 1;
    introduces him in the <i>Dunciad</i>, iii. 395, n. 1;
  Tory and Whig, called a, iii. 91;
  Tyburn psalm, iv. 189, n. 1;
  Tyrawley, Lord, ii. 211, n. 4;
  '<i>un politique</i>' &amp;c., iii. 324;
  valetudinarian, iii. 152, n. 1;
  vanity, iii. 347, n. 2;
  <i>Verses on his Grotto</i>, iv. 51;
  Latin translation, i. 157;
  versification, ii. 84, n. 6; iv. 46;
  Voltaire, i. 499, n. 1;
  Walpole's 'happier hour,' iii. 57, n. 2;
  Warburton at first attacks him, v. 80;
    defends him, i. 329;
    makes him a Christian, ii. 37, n. 1;
    made by him a bishop, ib.;
  Ward the quack-doctor, iii. 389, n. 5;
  Warton's <i>Essay</i>, i. 448; ii. 167;
  wit, definition of, v. 32, n. 3.</p>

<p>POPE, quotations,<br/>

  <i>Dunciad</i>, i. 41, iv. 189, n. 1; i. 87, iii. 76, n. 1; i. 141,<br/>

i. 55, n. 2; i. 253, ii. 321, n. 1; (first edition) iii. 149,<br/>

v. 419, n. 2; iii. 325, i. 227, n. 4; iv. 90, i. 266, n. 1; iv. 111,<br/>

v. 95, n. 2; iv. 167, iii. 182, n. 1; iv. 249, v. 219, n. 2; iv. 342,<br/>

iii. 199, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Eloisa to Abelard</i>, i. 38, i. 272; i. 134, v. 325, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Epitaph on Craggs</i>, iv. 445;<br/>

  <i>Essay on Criticism</i>, i. 66, iii. 72; i. 297, v. 32, n. 3; i. 370,<br/>

v. 290, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Essay on Man</i>, i. 99, iii. 98, n. 2; i. 221, iv. 373, n. 2;<br/>

ii. 20, iii. 80, 253, n. 3; ii. l0, i. 202; iii. 3, iv. 270, n. 2;<br/>

iv. 57, ii. 9, n. 1 iv. 219, v. 83, n. 2; iv. 267, iii. 82, n. 2;<br/>

iv. 380, iii. 342; iv. 383, iii. 19; n. l; iv. 390, iv. 420;<br/>

  <i>Moral Essays</i>, i. 69, i. 3; i. 174, iv. 316, n. 2; ii. 275, i. 249;<br/>

iii. 25, iii. 346, n. 3; iii. 242, i. 481; iii. 392, i. 375, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Prologue to Addison's Cato</i>, i. 30;<br/>

  <i>Satires, Prologue</i>, l. 99, i. 318; l. 135, i. 251, n. 2; l. 247,<br/>

i. 227, n. 4;  l. 259, ii. 368, n. 1; l. 283, iii. 328; l. 350,<br/>

v. 415, n. 4; 1. 378, ii. 229, n. 1;<br/>

  _Satires, Epilogue, i. 29, iii. 57, n. 2; iv. 364, n. 1; i. 131,<br/>

iv. 9, n. 5; i. 135, iii. 48, n. 2; ii. 70, i. 508; ii. 283, n. 1;<br/>

iv. 29, n. 1; ii. 208, iii. 380, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Imitations of Horace, Epistles</i>, i. vi. 3, ii. 158, n. 2; i.<br/>

vi. 120, ii. 211, n. 4; i. vi. 126, iii. 386, n. 4; ii. i. 14,<br/>

v. 372, n. 2; ii. i. 71, i. 118;  ii. i. 75, iv. 102, n. 2; ii. i. 180,<br/>

iii. 389, n. 5; ii. i. 221, ii. 132, n. 2; ii. ii. 23, iii. 237, n. 2;<br/>

ii. ii. 78, v. 265, n. 1; ii. ii. 157, i. 220; ii. ii. 276, i. 127, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Satires</i>, ii. i. 67, iii. 91, n. 6; ii. i. 78, iv. 318, n. 2;<br/>

ii. ii. 3, i. 105, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Universal Prayer</i>, iii. 346.<br/>

POPE, Mrs., i. 499, n. 1.<br/>

POPE, Dr. Walter, iv. 19.<br/>

POPERY. See ROMAN CATHOLICS.<br/>

POPULAR ELECTIONS, of the clergy, ii. 149.<br/>

POPULATION,<br/>

  America, increase in, ii. 314;<br/>

  changes in density, ii. 101-2;<br/>

  comparative population of counties in 1756, i. 307, n. 4;<br/>

  emigration, how far affected by, iii. 232-3;<br/>

  high convenience where it is large, v. 27.<br/>

PORSON, Richard,<br/>

  Bentley not a Scotchman, ii. 363, n. 4;<br/>

  described by Dr. Parr, iv. 385, n. 2;<br/>

  Hawkins, Sir J., ridicules, i. 224, n. 1; ii. 57, n. 5; iv. 370, n. 5;<br/>

  natural abilities, ii. 437, n. 2.<br/>

PORT, family of, iii. 187.<br/>

PORT, liquor for men, iii. 381; iv. 79.<br/>

PORT ELIOT, iv. 334.<br/>

PORTER, Endymion, v. 137, n. 4.<br/>

PORTER, Henry (Mrs. Johnson's first husband),<br/>

  Birmingham mercer, i. 86;<br/>

  family registry of births, &amp;c., i. 94, n. 3;<br/>

  insolvency, i. 95, n. 3;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 77.<br/>

PORTER, Captain (Henry Porter's son), i. 94, n. 3; ii. 462.<br/>

PORTER, —— (Henry Porter's son), ii. 388; iv. 89;<br/>

  death, iv. 256.<br/>

PORTER, Sir James, iii. 402.<br/>

PORTER, Mrs. (afterwards Mrs. Johnson). See under JOHNSON, Mrs.<br/>

PORTER, Mrs., the actress, i. 369, 382; iv. 243; ib., n. 6.<br/>

PORTER, Miss Lucy (Henry Porter's daughter and Johnson's stepdaughter),<br/>

  birth, i. 94, n. 3;<br/>

  Boswell calls on her, ii. 462; iii. 412, 414;<br/>

  Dodd's <i>Convicts Address</i>, reads, iii. 141, n. 2;<br/>

  fortune, her, and house, ii. 462;<br/>

  Johnson's account of her, i. 370;<br/>

    earlier letters to her, ii. 387, n. 3<br/>

    (for his letters, See under JOHNSON, letters);<br/>

    feelings towards her, i. 515; ii. 462, n. 1;<br/>

    her feelings towards, ii. 462, 469;<br/>

    memory, i. 40;<br/>

    personal appearance, i. 94;<br/>

    present to her of a box, ii. 387;<br/>

    prologue to Kelly's comedy, disowns, iii. 114, n. 1;<br/>

    will, not in, iv. 402, n. 2;<br/>

  mother's wedding-ring, does not value her, i. 237;<br/>

  residence in Lichfield, i. 110, 346, n. 1, 347, 515;<br/>

  verses said to be addressed to her, i. 92, n. 2;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 103, 340, n. 1, 512; ii. 468; iii. 132, 417; iv. 374, 394.<br/>

PORTER, A STREET-, Johnson drives a load off his back, iv. 71.<br/>

PORTER, Johnson sends a present of, ii. 272, 275.<br/>

PORTEUS, Beilby, Bishop of Chester (afterwards of London),<br/>

  Boswell, attentive to, iii. 413, 415;<br/>

  Jenyns's, Soame, conversion, i. 316, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Life of Secker</i>, iv. 29;<br/>

  reverend fops, iv. 76;<br/>

  Sunday knotting, iii. 242, n. 3;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 124, 279, 280.<br/>

PORTLAND, third Duke of, iii. 224, n. 1; iv. 174, n. 3.<br/>

  See COALITION MINISTRY.<br/>

PORTLAND, Dowager Duchess of, iii. 425.<br/>

PORTMORE, Lord, Johnson's letter to him, iv. 268, n. 1.<br/>

PORTRAITS,<br/>

  their chief excellence, v. 219;<br/>

  portrait-painting, improper for women, ii. 362;<br/>

  of Johnson: See under JOHNSON, portraits.<br/>

PORTUGAL, iii. 23, 445.<br/>

PORTUGAL PIECES, iv. 104.<br/>

PORTUGUESE, discovery of the Indies, i. 455; n. 3; ii. 479;<br/>

iii. 204, n. 1; iv. 12, n. 2.<br/>

POSSIBILITIES, v. 46.<br/>

POST,<br/>

  Brighton, to, iii. 92, n. 3;<br/>

  double letters, i. 283, n. 1;<br/>

  franking letters, iii. 364; iv. 361, n. 3;<br/>

  penny-post, i. 121, 151;<br/>

  postage from Lisbon, iii. 23;<br/>

    to Oxford, i. 283, n. 1.<br/>

POST-CHAISE,<br/>

  driving from, or to something, iii. 5, 457;<br/>

  Gibbon delights in them, ii. 453, n. 1;<br/>

    also Johnson, ii. 453;<br/>

  if accompanied by a pretty woman, iii. 162;<br/>

  in 1758, v. 56, n. 2.<br/>

POST-HORSES, charge per mile, v. 427.<br/>

POSTERITY, prescribing rules to, ii. 417.<br/>

POT, Mr., iv. 5, n. 1.<br/>

POTT, Rev. Archdeacon, ii. 459.<br/>

POTT, Mr., a surgeon, iv. 239.<br/>

POTTER, Robert, translation of Aeschylus, iii. 256.<br/>

POVERTY,<br/>

  'All this excludes but one evil—poverty,' iii. 160;<br/>

  arguments for it, i. 441;<br/>

  a great evil, iv. 149, 152, 155, 157, 163, 351.<br/>

POWELL, a clerk, iv. 223, n. 3.<br/>

POWER,<br/>

  all power desirable, ii. 357;<br/>

  despotic, iii. 283;<br/>

  of the Crown, ii. 170.<br/>

POWERSCOURT, Lord, v. 253.<br/>

PRACTICE. See PRINCIPLES.<br/>

PRAGUE, iii. 458.<br/>

PRAISE,<br/>

  on compulsion, ii. 51;<br/>

  extravagant, iii. 225; iv. 82;<br/>

  value of it, iv. 32, 255, n. 2.<br/>

PRATT, Chief Justice. See CAMDEN, Lord.<br/>

PRAYER,<br/>

  arguments against it, v. 38;<br/>

  dead, for the, ii. 163;<br/>

  efficacy, its, v. 68;<br/>

  family prayer, v. 121;<br/>

  form of prayer, v. 365;<br/>

  Hume on Leechman's doctrine, v. 68, n. 4;<br/>

  Johnson designs a <i>Book of Prayers</i>, iv. 293, 376;<br/>

    offered a large sum for one, iv. 410;<br/>

  lies in prayers, iv. 295;<br/>

  reasoning on its nature unprofitable, ii. 178.<br/>

PRAYERS, by Johnson,<br/>

  against inquisitive and perplexing thoughts, iv. 370, n. 3;<br/>

  before his last communion, iv. 416-7;<br/>

  before study, iii. 90;<br/>

  before the study of law, i. 489;<br/>

  Chambers, Catherine, for, ii. 43;<br/>

  death of his wife, on the, i. 235;<br/>

  <i>Dictionary</i>, on beginning vol. ii. of his, i. 255;<br/>

  Easter Day, 1777, iii. 99;<br/>

  engaging in Politicks with H——, i. 489;<br/>

  forgiveness for neglect of duties in married life, i. 240;<br/>

  January 1, 1753, i. 251;<br/>

  new scheme of life, i. 350;<br/>

  'On my return to life,' i. 234, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Rambler</i>, before the, i. 202;<br/>

  repentance and pardon, for, iv. 397;<br/>

  resolutions, on, i. 483;<br/>

  study of philosophy, on the, i. 302;<br/>

  Trinity, the, invoked, ii. 255.<br/>

<i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, Johnson's, i. 235, n. 1; ii. 476;<br/>

  publication, iv. 376, n. 4.<br/>

PREACHERS, women, i. 463.<br/>

PREACHING,<br/>

  above the capacity of the congregation, iv. 185;<br/>

  plain language needed, i. 459; ii. 123.<br/>

<i>Preceptor, The</i>, i. 192.<br/>

PRECISENESS, iv. 89.<br/>

PRECOCITY, ii. 408.<br/>

PREDESTINATION, ii. 104.<br/>

PREFACES, Johnson's talent for, i. 292.<br/>

PREMIER, i. 295, n. 1.<br/>

PREMIUM-SCHEME, i. 318.<br/>

PRENDERGAST (Prendergrass), an officer, ii. 182, 183, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Presbyterian</i>, in the sense of <i>Unitarian</i>, ii. 408, n. 1.<br/>

PRESBYTERIANS AND PRESBYTERIANISM,<br/>

  compared with Church of Rome, ii. 103;<br/>

  differ from it chiefly in forms, ii. 150;<br/>

  doctrine, ii. 104;<br/>

  form of prayer, no, ii. 104;<br/>

  frightened by Popery, v. 57.<br/>

PRESCIENCE, of the Deity, iii. 290.<br/>

PRESCRIPTION OF MURDER. See MURDER.<br/>

<i>Present State of England</i>, iv. 311.<br/>

PRESENT TIME, never happy, ii. 350.<br/>

PRESENT TIMES, Johnson never inveighed against them, iii. 3.<br/>

PRESS,<br/>

  awed by parliament as regards report of debates, i. 115; iii. 459-60;<br/>

iv. 140, n. 1;<br/>

  complete freedom obtained, i. 116;<br/>

  Johnson attacks its liberty, ii. 60;<br/>

    vindicates it, ib., n. 3;<br/>

    discusses it with Dr. Parr, iv. 15, n. 5;<br/>

  Mansfield tries to stifle it, i. 116, n. 1;<br/>

  law of libel, iii. 16, n. 1;<br/>

  licentiousness, its, i. 116;<br/>

    debate on it, iv. 318, n. 3;<br/>

  prosecutions in 1764, ii. 60, n. 3;<br/>

  superfoetation, its, iii. 332.<br/>

PRESS-GANGS, iii. 460.<br/>

PRESTBURY, v. 432, n. 2.<br/>

PRESTICK, ii. 271, n. 4.<br/>

PRESTON, iii. 135, n. 1.<br/>

PRESTON, Sir Charles, iv. 154.<br/>

PRETENDER, the Young,<br/>

  account of his escape, v. 187-205, 264;<br/>

    dresses in women's clothes, v. 188;<br/>

    at Kingsburgh, v. 185, 189;<br/>

    shoes, ib.;<br/>

    in Rasay, v. 174, n. 1, 190-4;<br/>

    fears assassination, v. 194;<br/>

    speaks of Culloden, ib.;<br/>

    returns to Sky, v. 195;<br/>

    pretends to be a servant, v. 195, 196-7;<br/>

    his odd face, v. 196;<br/>

    goes to Mackinnon's country, v. 197;<br/>

    to Knoidart, v. 199;<br/>

    reward offered for him, v. 186, 199, n. 1;<br/>

  agitating a rebellion in 1752, i. 146, n. 2;<br/>

  base character, his, v. 200, n. 1;<br/>

  Charles III, ii. 253;<br/>

  Derby, march to, iii. 162;<br/>

  designation proper for him, v. 185, n. 4;<br/>

  Johnson sleeps in his bed, v. 185;<br/>

  London, in, i. 279, n. 5; v. 196, n. 2, 201;<br/>

  Voltaire's reflections on him, v. 199.<br/>

PRICE, Archdeacon, v. 454.<br/>

PRICE, Dr. Richard<br/>

  account of him, iv. 434;<br/>

  Hume, dines with, ii. 441, n. 5;<br/>

  Johnson would not meet him, iv. 238, n. 1, 434;<br/>

  London-born children, iv. 210.<br/>

PRICE, ——, a vain Welsh scholar, v. 438.<br/>

<i>Prideauxs Connection</i>, iv. 311.<br/>

PRIESTLEY, Dr. Joseph,<br/>

  Boswell attacks him, iv. 238, n. 1, 433;<br/>

    Parr defends him, iv. 238, n. 1, 434;<br/>

  discoveries in chemistry, iv. 237, n. 6, 238;<br/>

  Elwall's trial, account of, ii. 164, n. 5;<br/>

  Franklin praises his moderation, iv. 434;<br/>

  Gibbon and Horsley attack him, iv. 437;<br/>

  Heberden, Dr., a benefactor to him, iv. 228, n. 2;<br/>

  house burnt by rioters, iv. 238, n. 1;<br/>

  'index-scholar,' iv. 407, n. 4;<br/>

  Johnson's estimate of his writings, iv. 407, n. 4;<br/>

    interview with, iv. 434;<br/>

    on the pronunciation of Latin, ii. 404, n. 1;<br/>

  Mackintosh's character of him, iv. 443;<br/>

  Philosophical necessity, iii. 291, n. 2; iv. 433-4;<br/>

  Shelburne, Lord, lives with, iv. 191, n. 4;<br/>

  theological works, ii. 124.<br/>

PRIESTS, enemies to liberty, v. 255, n. 5.<br/>

PRIME MINISTER, name and office, ii. 355; n. 2;<br/>

  not in Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>, i. 295, n. 1;<br/>

  no real one since Walpole's time, ii. 355.<br/>

PRIMROSE, Lady, v. 201.<br/>

PRINCE, the bookseller, i. 291.<br/>

PRINCE FREDERICK (brother of George III), v. 185, n. 1,<br/>

PRINCE OF WALES, happiest of men, i. 368, n. 3; iv. 182.<br/>

PRINCE OF WALES (Frederick, father of George III),<br/>

  generosity, shows, v. 188, n. I;<br/>

  Mallet's dependence on him, i. 329, n. 3;<br/>

  Pope's repartee to him, iv. 50;<br/>

  Vane, Anne, his mistress, v. 49, n. 4.<br/>

PRINCE OF WALES (George III), v. 185, n. 1.<br/>

PRINCE OF WALES (George IV),<br/>

  Boswell carries up an address to him, iv. 248, n. 2;<br/>

    insolence, his, iv. 270, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson pleased with his knowledge of the Scriptures as a child, ii. 33,<br/>

n. 3;<br/>

  language as a young man, his, ib.;<br/>

  Thurlow and Sir John Ladd, iv. 412, n. 1.<br/>

PRINCESS OF WALES, Dowager, (mother of George III),<br/>

  presents to Lord Bute, iv. 127, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Prince Titi</i>, ii. 391.<br/>

<i>Prince Voltiger</i>, ii. 108.<br/>

PRINCIPLE, goodness founded upon it, i. 443;<br/>

  things founded on no principle, v. 159.<br/>

PRINCIPLES, general, must be had from books, ii. 361.<br/>

PRINCIPLES and practice, i. 418, n. 3; ii. 341; iii. 282; iv. 396;<br/>

v. 210, 359.<br/>

PRINGLE, Sir John,<br/>

  Johnson could not agree with him, iii. 65; v. 376, 384;<br/>

  madness, on the cause of, iii. 176, n. 1;<br/>

  President of the Royal Society, iii. 65, n. 1;<br/>

  Smith's <i>Wealth of Nations</i>, ii. 430;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 59, n. 3, 164; iii. 7, 15, n. 2, 247; v. 97.<br/>

PRINTER'S DEVIL, iv. 99.<br/>

PRINTERS, keeping their coach, ii. 226;<br/>

  wages of journeymen, ii. 323.<br/>

PRINTING, early printed books, v. 459;<br/>

  effect on learning, iii. 37;<br/>

  people without it barbarous, ii. 170.<br/>

PRIOR, Sir James,<br/>

  Johnson's projected <i>Life of Goldsmith</i>, iii. 100, n. 1.<br/>

PRIOR, Matthew, amorous pedantry, iii. 192, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Animula vagtila</i>, translation of, iii. 420, n. 2;<br/>

  borrowing, instances of his, iii. 396;<br/>

  <i>Chameleon</i>, ii. 158, n. I;<br/>

  <i>Despairing Shepherd</i>, ii. 78, n. 2;<br/>

  Goldsmith republishes two of his poems, iii. 192, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Gualterus Danistonus ad Amicos</i>, translation of, iii. 119, n. 6;<br/>

  Hailes, Lord, censured by, iii. 192;<br/>

  lady's book, a, iii. 192;<br/>

  love verses, ii. 78;<br/>

  'My noble, lovely little Peggy,' iii. 425, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Paulo Purganti</i>, iii. 192;<br/>

  Pitcairne, translation from, v. 58.<br/>

PRIOR PARK, v. 80, n. 5.<br/>

PRISONS, Johnson's praise of a good keeper, iii. 433.<br/>

  See under LONDON, Newgate, &amp;c.<br/>

PRITCHARD, Mrs., the actress, good but affected, v. 126;<br/>

  <i>Irene</i>, acted, i. 197;<br/>

  in common life a vulgar idiot, iv. 243;<br/>

  mechanical player, ii. 348;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 92.<br/>

PRIVATE CONVERSATION, iv. 216.<br/>

PRIZE-FIGHTING, v. 229.<br/>

PRIZE VERSES, in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>., i. 91, n. 2, 136.<br/>

PRIZES, money arising from, ii. 353, n. 4.<br/>

<i>Probationary Odes for the Laureateship</i>,<br/>

  A Great Personage, i. 219, n. 3;<br/>

  Boswell ridiculed, i. 116, n. 1;<br/>

    and the two Wartons, ii. 41, n. 1.<br/>

PROBATIONER, cause of a, ii. 171.<br/>

<i>Probus Britannicus</i>, i. 141.<br/>

<i>Procerity</i>, i. 308.<br/>

<i>Prodigious</i>, iii. 231, n. 4, 303; v. 396, n. 3.<br/>

PROFESSION,<br/>

  choice of one, v. 47;<br/>

  misfortune not to be bred to one, iii. 309, n. 1;<br/>

  time and mind given to one not very great, ii. 344.<br/>

<i>Profession, The</i>, iii. 285, n. 2.<br/>

PROFESSIONAL MAN, solemnity of manner, iv. 310.<br/>

<i>Profitable Instructions, &amp;c.</i>, i. 431, n. 2.<br/>

PROFUSION, iii. 195.<br/>

<i>Progress of Discontent</i>, i. 283, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Project, The</i>, iii. 318.<br/>

<i>Project for the Employment of Authors</i>, i. 306, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Prologue at the Opening of Drury Lane Theatre</i>, i. 181; ii. 69;<br/>

iv. 25, 310.<br/>

PRONUNCIATION,<br/>

  difficulty of fixing it, ii. 161;<br/>

  Irish, Scotch, and provincial, ii. 158-160.<br/>

<i>Properantia</i>, i. 223.<br/>

PROPERTY, depends on chastity, ii. 457;<br/>

  permanent property, ii. 340.<br/>

PROPITIATION, doctrine of the, iv. 124; v. 88.<br/>

<i>Proposals for printing Bibliotheca Harleiana</i>, i. 153.<br/>

PROSE, English. See STYLE.<br/>

PROSPERITY, vulgar, iii. 410.<br/>

PROSPERO, i. 216.<br/>

PROSTITUTION, severe laws needed, iii. 18.<br/>

PROTESTANT ASSOCIATION, iii. 427, n. 1.<br/>

PROTESTANTISM, converts to it, ii. 106.<br/>

PROVIDENCE,<br/>

  entails not an encroachment on his dominions, ii. 420, 421;<br/>

  his hand seen in the breaking of a rope, v. 104;<br/>

  a particular providence, iv. 272, n. 4.<br/>

PROVISIONS, carrying, to a man's house, v. 73.<br/>

<i>Provoked Husband, The, or The Journey to London</i>, ii. 48, 50; iv. 284.<br/>

PRUDENCE, '<i>Nullum numen,'</i> &amp;c., iv. 180.<br/>

PRUSSIA, Queen of, (the mother of Frederick the Great), iv. 107, n. 1.<br/>

PSALM 36, v. 444.<br/>

PSALMANAZAR, George,<br/>

  account of him, Appendix A, iii. 443-9;<br/>

  arrives in London, iii. 444, 447;<br/>

  at Oxford, iii. 445, 449;<br/>

  birth, education, and wanderings, iii. 446-7;<br/>

    writes his <i>Memoirs</i>, iii. 445;<br/>

  Club in Old Street, his, iv. 187;<br/>

  <i>Complete System of Geography</i>, article in the, iii. 445;<br/>

  <i>Description of Formosa</i>, iii. 444;<br/>

  hypocrisy, never free from, iii. 444; 448-9;<br/>

  Innes, Dr., aided in his fraud by, i. 359;<br/>

  invention of his name, iii. 447;<br/>

  Johnson sought after him, iii. 314;<br/>

  respected him as much as a Bishop, iv. 274;<br/>

  <i>Spectator</i>, ridiculed in the, iii. 449.<br/>

PUBLICATIONS, spurious, ii. 433.<br/>

<i>Publick Advertiser</i>, i. 300; ii. 46, n. 2, 71, n. 2, 93, n. 3.<br/>

PUBLIC AFFAIRS vex no man, iv. 220. See ENGLAND.<br/>

PUBLIC AMUSEMENTS, ii. 169.<br/>

<i>Public dinners</i>, iv. 367, n. 3.<br/>

PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS, iii. 53.<br/>

PUBLIC JUDGMENT. See WORLD.<br/>

<i>Public Ledger</i>, iii. 113, n. 3.<br/>

PUBLIC LIFE,<br/>

  eminent figure made in it with little superiority of mind, iv. 178.<br/>

PUBLIC OVENS, ii. 215.<br/>

PUBLIC SCHOOLS. See SCHOOLS.<br/>

PUBLIC SPEAKING, ii. 139, 339.<br/>

<i>Public Virtue</i>, iv. 20.<br/>

PUBLIC WORSHIP, i. 418, n. 1; iv. 414, n. 1.<br/>

PUBLISHERS. See BOOKSELLERS.<br/>

<i>Pudding, Meditation on a</i>, v. 352.<br/>

PUFFENDORF,<br/>

  corporal punishment, ii. 157;<br/>

  <i>Introduction to History</i>, iv. 311;<br/>

  not in practice as a lawyer, ii. 430.<br/>

PULPIT, liberty of the, iii. 59, 91.<br/>

PULSATION, effect on life, iii. 34.<br/>

PULTENEY, William. See BATH, Earl of.<br/>

PUNCH, bowl of, i. 334.<br/>

PUNCTUATION, Lyttelton's <i>History of Henry II</i>, iii. 32, n. 5.<br/>

PUNIC WAR, iii. 206, n. 1.<br/>

PUNISHMENT, eternal, iii. 200; iv. 299.<br/>

PUNS,<br/>

  'dignifying a pun,' v. 32, n. 3.<br/>

  Johnson's contempt for them, ii. 241; iv. 316;<br/>

    Boswell's approval of them, ib.;<br/>

  one in <i>Menagiana</i>, ii. 241.<br/>

  See under BURKE and JOHNSON.<br/>

PUNSTER, defined, ii. 241, n. 2.<br/>

PURCELL, Thomas, ii. 343.<br/>

PURGATORIANS, ii. 162.<br/>

PURGATORY, ii. 104, 163. See MIDDLE STATE.<br/>

PUTNEY, ii. 444.<br/>

PYE, Henry James, poet laureate, i. 185, n. 1.<br/>

PYM, John,<br/>

  member of Broadgates Hall, i. 75, n. 3;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 118.<br/>

PYRAMIDS of Egypt, iii. 352.<br/>

PYTHAGOREAN DISCIPLINE, iii. 261.<br/>
</p>

<h3>Q.</h3>

<p>QUACK DOCTORS, iii. 389.
QUAKERS,
  Boswell loves their simplicity, ii. 457;
  Johnson liked individual Quakers, but not the sect, ii. 458;
    on their objection to fine clothes, iii. 188, n. 4;
  many a man a Quaker without knowing it, ii. 457;
  Pennsylvanian Quakers, vote of, iv. 212, n. 1;
  proselyte, a young, iii. 298;
  slavery, abolitionists of, ii. 478;
  soldiers, clothing to the, iv. 212;
  texts, literal interpretation of, iv. 211;
  tythes and persecution inseparable, v. 423;
  women preaching, i. 463. See under KNOWLES, Mrs.
<i>Qualifying a wrong</i>, iii. 63, n. 1.
<i>Qualitied</i>, iv. 174.
QUALITY, women of, iii. 353.
<i>Queen Elizabeth's Champion</i>, v. 241, n. 2.
QUEEN'S ARMS CLUB, iv. 87.
QUEEN'S HOUSE LIBRARY, ii. 33.
QUEENSBERRY, family of, iii. 163.
QUEENSBERRY, Duke of, Gay and the <i>Beggar's Opera</i>, ii. 368.
QUEENY (Miss Thrale), iii. 422, n. 4; v. 451.
<i>Quem Deus vult perdere, &amp;c</i>., ii. 445, n. 1; iv. 181.
QUESTIONING, ii. 472; iii. 57, 268.
QUIN, James,
  Bath, praises, iii. 45, n. 1;
  <i>Beggar's Opera</i>, anecdote of the, ii. 368;
  Falstaff, his, iv. 243, n. 6;
  kings and January 30, v. 382, n. 2;
  Thomson, intimacy with, iii. 117, n. 2;
  vanity, his, iii. 264.
QUINTILIAN, iv. 35.
QUIXOTE, Don. See under CERVANTES.
<i>Quos Deus null perdere, prius dementat</i>, ii. 445, n. 1; iv. 181.
QUOTATION, the <i>parole</i> of literary men, iv. 102.
QUOTATIONS, untraced, iv. 181.
<i>Quotidian</i>, v. 345-6.</p>

<h3>R.</h3>

<p id="id00861" style="margin-left: 0%; margin-right: 0%">RABELAIS, Garagantua, iii. 256;
  surpassed by Johnson, ii. 231.
<i>Race, The</i>, by Mercurius Spur, Esq., ii. 31.
RACINE, 'goes round the world,' v. 311.
RACKSTROW, Colonel, of the Trained Bands, iv. 319.
RADCLIFFE, Charles, his execution, i. 180.
RADCLIFFE, Dr., Master of Pembroke College, i. 271.
RADCLIFFE, Dr. John, travelling fellowships, iv. 293.
RADICALS, iii. 460.
RALEIGH, Sir Walter, autograph letter, i. 227;
  Birch edits his smaller pieces, i. 226;
  execution, his, i. 180, n. 2;
  Johnson mentions his <i>Works</i> in the preface to his_ Dictionary_,
iii. 194, n. 2.
RALPH, James, <i>The Champion</i>, i. 169, n. 2.
<i>Rambler</i>, account of it, i. 201-226;
  contributors, i. 203, 208, n. 3;
  editions and sale, i. 208, 212, 255;
    Scotch edition, i. 210;
  revision of collected edition, i. 203, n. 6;
  publication, i. 202;
  sale of a sixteenth-share, ii. 208, n. 3;
  hastily written, i. 203; iii. 42;
  could be made better, iv. 309;
  hints for essays, i. 204-7;
  origin of the name, i. 202;
  style, i. 217;
  club in an Essex town incensed by it, i. 215;
  friend, learning one's faults from a, iv. 281, n. 1;
  Garrick and Prospero, i. 216;
  'hard words,' i. 208, n. 3;
  index, iv. 325;
  in Italian, <i>Il Genio errante and Il Vagabondo</i>, iii. 411;
  Johnson's epitaph, quotation from it in, iv. 445;
    gives a copy to Edwards, iv. 90;
    opinion of it, i. 210, n. 1;
      thinks it 'too wordy,' iv. 5;
    portrait prefixed, iv. 421, n. 2;
    wife praises it, i. 210;
  ladies strangely formal, i. 223;
  Langton admires it, i. 247;
  last number, i. 226, 233;
  lessons taught by it, i. 213;
  mottoes translated, i. 210, n. 3, 211, 225;
  Murphy's translation from the French, i. 356;
  <i>Necessity of Cultivating Politeness</i>, v. 82, n. 2;
  quotation in Colonel Myddelton's inscription, iv. 443;
  Russian translation, iv. 277;
  Shenstone, praised by, ii. 452;
  suicide, supposed to recommend, iv. 150, n. 2;
  virtuoso, description of a, iv. 314, n. 2; v. 61, n. 5;
  Young's, Dr., copy, i. 214.
<i>Rambler, Beauties of the</i>, i. 214.
<i>Raniblefs Magazine</i>, i. 202.
RAMSAY, Allan, the elder, the poet,
  dedication to the Countess of Eglintoune, v. 374, n. 3;
  <i>Gentle Shepherd</i>, ii. 220;
  <i>Highland Laddie</i>, v. 184, n. 1.
RAMSAY, Allan, the son, the portrait-painter,
  death, iv. 260, n. 1, 366, n. 1;
  dinners at his house, iii. 331-6,382-3, 407-9;
  house in Harley Street, iii. 391, n. 2;
  Italy, visits, iii. 250; iv. 260;
  Johnson loves him, iii. 336;
    politeness, praises, iii. 331;
  Pope's poetry less admired than formerly, iii. 332;
  Select Society, founds the, v. 393, n. 4;
  'There lived a young man' &amp;c., quotes, iii. 252;
  mentioned, iii. 254; iv. I, n. 1.
RANBY, John,
  <i>Doubts on the Abolition of the Slave Trade</i>, iii. 205.
RANGER, the character of, ii. 50.
RANK,
  its claims, iii. 55;
  Johnson's respect for it, i. 443, 447-8;
  morals of high people, iii. 353.
RANKE, Professor, Sixtus Quintus, v. 239, n.
RAPHAEL,
  Johnson admires his pictures, ii. 392;
  mentioned, i. 248, n. 3.
RAPTURIST, ii. 41, n. 1.
RASAY, the Macleods of,
  account of them, v. 165, 167;
  estates, v. 412, n. 2;
  family happiness, v. 178;
  league with the Macdonalds, v. 174;
  Johnson compliments them in his <i>Journey</i>, ii. 304;
  they praise him, ib.
RASAY, John Macleod, Laird of, 'Macgillichallum,' v. 161, n. 2;
  his <i>carriage</i>, v. 162, 179, n. 2;
  income, v. 165, n. 2;
  patriarchal life, v. 167;
  befriends the Pretender, v. 190-5;
  Johnson's mistake about the chieftainship, ii. 303, 380, 382, 411;
    correspondence about it, v. 410-413;
    entertained by, ii. 305; iv. 155; v. 413, n. 1;
    visits him, v. 165-179, 183.
RASAY, old Laird of, out in the '45, v. 174, 188, 190, 199.
<i>Rascal</i>, Johnson's use of the term, iii. 1.
<i>Rasselas</i>,
  account of its publication, i. 340-4;
    date of its composition and publication, i. 342, n. 2, 516;
    editions,
      first, i. 340, n, 3;
      fifth, ii. 208, n. 3;
      an American one, ii. 207;
    origin of the name, i. 340, n. 3;
    price paid for it, i. 341;
    translations, i. 341; ii. 208;
      in French by Baretti, ib., n. 2;
    written in the evenings of one week to pay the expenses of
Johnson's mother's funeral, i. 341;
  Boswell's yearly reading, i. 342; iii. 133;
    made unhappy by it, iii. 317;
  <i>Candide</i>, compared with, i. 342; iii. 356;
  choice of life, ii. 22, n. l;
  civilisation, advantages of, ii. 73, n. 3;
  Europeans, the power of the, iv. 119;
  Gough Square, written in, iii. 405, n. 6;
  Imlac and the Great Mogul, ii. 40, n. 4;
  influence of places on the mind, v. 334, n. 1;
  Johnson reads it in 1781, iv. 119;
  <i>Lobo's Abyssinia</i>, partly suggested by, i. 89;
  Macaulay's, Dr. J., <i>Bibliography</i>, ii. 208, n. 3;
  marriages, late, ii. 128, n. 4;
  misery of life, the, iii. 317;
  praise to an old man, i. 339, n. 3;
  resolutions, ii. 113, n. 3;
  retirement from the world, v. 62, nn. 1 and 4;
  scholar, the business of a, ii. 119, n. 1;
  solitude of a great city, iii. 379, n. 2;
  sorrow, the cure for, iii. 6;
  spirits of the dead, i. 343;
  travelling in Europe, i. 340, n. 1;
  <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>, resemblance to the, i. 342.
RAT,
  grey or Hanover, ii. 455;
  'Now, Muse, let's sing of Rats,' ii. 453.
RAWLINSON, Dr., iv. 161.
RAY, John,
  British insects, ii. 248;
  Collection of north-country words, ii. 91;
  <i>Nomenclature</i>, ii. 361.
RAY, Miss, iii. 383.
RAYMOND, S., ii. 338, n. 2.
RAYNAL, Abbé, iv. 434-5.
READING,
  advice of an old gentleman, i. 446;
  art, its, iv. 207;
  boys should read any book they will, iii. 385; iv. 21;
  general amusement, iv. 217, n. 4;
  hard reading, i. 446;
  inclination to be followed, i. 428; iii. 43, 193;
  knowledge got by it compared with that got by conversation, ii. 361;
  people do not willingly read, iv. 218;
  reading books to the end, i. 71; ii. 226; iv. 308;
  reading no more than one could utter, iv. 31;
  snatches useful, iv. 21;
  Voltaire testifies to its increase in England, ii. 402, n. 1;
  youth the season for plying books, i. 446.
   See JOHNSON, reading.
REBELLION, natural to men, v. 394.
REBELLION OF 1745-6,
  Boswell's projected history of it, iii. 162;
    would have to be printed abroad, ib.;
  cruelty shown to the rebels, i. 146;
  effect on the <i>Gent</i>. <i>Mag</i>., i. 176, n. 2;
  Highlanders' wants, ii. 126;
  Johnson's occupation at the time, i. 176;
  noble attempt, iii. 162.
REBELS, never friends to arts, ii. 223;
  successful, ii. 223.
<i>Recollecting</i>, iv. 126.
<i>Recreations and Studies of a Country Clergyman</i>, iv 190, n. 2.
RECRUITING, iii. 399, n. 3.
<i>Recruiting Officer</i>, iv. 7.
RECUPERO, Signor, ii. 468, n. 1.
<i>Red Coat</i>, v. 140.
RED SEA, iii. 134, n. i, 455.
REDRESS FOR RIDICULE, v. 295.
REED, Isaac, aids Johnson in the <i>Lives</i>, iv. 37;
  mentioned, i. 169, n. 2; ii. 240, n. 4; iii. 201, n. 3; v. 57, n. 2.
REED, John, iii. 281, n. 3.
REES, Dr., ii. 203, n. 3.
REFINEMENT, in education, iii. 169.
<i>Reflections on a grave digging in Westminster Abbey</i>, ii. 26;
v. 117, n. 4.
<i>Reflections on the State of Portugal</i>, i. 306.
REFORMATION, Church revenues lessened, iii. 138;
  freedom from bondage, iii. 60;
  the light of revelation obscured upon political motives, ii. 28.
REFORMERS, why burnt, ii. 251.
<i>Regale</i>, iii. 308, n. 2; v. 347, n. 1.
REGATTA, iii. 206, n. 1.
REGICIDES, ii. 370.
REGISTRATION OF DEEDS, iv. 74.
<i>Rehearsal, The</i>, ii. 168; iv. 320.
REID, Andrew, iii. 32, n. 5.
REID, Professor Thomas, meets Johnson in Glasgow, v. 369, 370;
  <i>original principles</i>, his, i. 471;
  Scotticisms corrected by Hume, ii. 72, n. 2;
  mentioned, ii. 53, n. 1.
REIGN OF TERROR, i. 465, n. 1.
REINDEER, ii. 168.
RELATIONS, a man's ready friends, v. 105;
  in London, ii. 177.
  See FRIENDS, natural.
RELIGION, amount of religion in the country, ii. 96;
  ancients not in earnest as to it, iii. 10;
  balancing of accounts, iv. 225;
  changing it, ii. 466; iii. 298;
  choosing one for oneself, iii. 299;
  College jokers its defenders, iv. 288;
  differences of opinion not much thought of, iv. 291;
  general ignorance, iii. 50;
  hard, made to appear, v. 316;
  ignorance of the first notion, iv. 216;
  joy in it, iii. 339;
  particular places for it, iv. 226;
  people with none, iv. 215; perversions, ii. 129;
  religious conversation banished, ii. 124;
  State, to be regulated by the, ii. 14; iv. 12;
  unfitness of poetry for it, iii. 358, n. 3; iv. 39.
RELIGIOUS ORDERS. See MONASTERY.
<i>Remarks on Dr. Johnson's Journey to the Hebrides</i>, ii. 308, n. 1.
<i>Remarks on Johnson's Life of Milton</i>, i. 231, n. 2.
<i>Remarks on the characters of the Court of Queen Anne</i>, iv. 333, n. 5.
<i>Remarks on the Militia Bill</i>, i. 307.
REMBRANDT, iii. 161.
REMEDIES, prescribing, ii. 260.
<i>Remembering</i>, distinguished from <i>recollecting</i>, iv. 126.
<i>Remonstrance, The</i>, ii. 113.
<i>Renegade</i> defined, i. 296.
RENTS, carried to a distance, iii. 177;
  how they should be fixed, v. 293:
  paid in kind, iv. 18; v. 254, n. 2.
  See LANDLORDS.
REPENTANCE in dying, iv. 212.
<i>Republic of Letters</i>, v. 80, n. 4.
REPUBLICS, respect for authority wanting, ii. 153.
<i>Republics</i>. See <i>Respublicae Elzevirianae</i>.
REPUTATION injured by spurious publications, ii. 433.
RESENTMENT, iii. 39; iv. 367.
RESOLUTIONS, rarely efficacious, ii. 113, 360.
RESPECT, not to be paid to an adversary, ii. 442; v. 29.
<i>Respectable</i>, iii. 241, n. 2.
<i>Respublica Hungarica</i>, ii. 7.
<i>Respublicae Elzevirianae</i>, ii. 7, n. 2; iii. 52.
REST, man never at rest, iii. 252.
RESTORATION, ii. 369, 370; v. 406.
RESTRAINT, need of, iii. 53.
RESURRECTION OF THE BODY, iv. 93, 95.
<i>Retirement</i>, ii. 133, n. 1.
RETIREMENT, from the world, v. 62; its vices, ib., n. 5.
RETIRING FROM BUSINESS, ii. 337; iii. 176, n. 1.
RETREAT, cheap, few places left, ii. 124.
<i>Retreat of the Ten Thousand</i>, iv. 32.
REVELATION, attacks on it excite anger, iii. 11.
<i>Revelation, Book of</i>, ii. 163.
REVERENCE, for government impaired, iii. 3;
  general relaxation of it, iii. 262.
REVIEWS AND REVIEWERS, acknowledgments to them improper, iv. 57;
  defiance, to be set at, v. 274;
  <i>Monthly</i> and <i>Critical</i> impartial, iii. 32;
    attack each other, ib., n. 2;
  payment for articles, iv. 214;
  well-written, iii. 44.
  See <i>Critical</i> and <i>Monthly Reviews</i>.
<i>Revisal of Shakespeare's Text</i>, i. 263, n. 3.
<i>Revolution</i>, defined, i. 295, n. 1.
REVOLUTION OF 1688,
  could not be avoided, ii. 341; iii. 3; iv. 170, 171, n. 1;
  <i>Lilliburlero</i>, ii. 347;
  reverence for government impaired by it, iii. 3; iv. 165; v. 202;
  writing against it got Shebbeare the pillory
    and a pension, ii. 112, n. 3.
REVOLUTION SOCIETY, the, iv. 40.
REVOLUTIONS, 'Happy revolutions,' ii. 224.
REWLEY ABBEY, i. 273.
REYNOLDS, Miss, Barnard's verses on Johnson, iv. 431-3;
  coolness with her brother, i. 486, n. 1;
  irresolution, her, i. 486, n. 1;
  Johnson's affection for her, i. 486, n. 1;
    bequest to her, iv. 402, n. 2;
      and the Cotterells, i. 246, n. 2;
    dress and study, i. 328, n. 1;
      and Garagantua, iii. 256;
      and Hannah More, iii. 293; iv. 341, n. 6;
    letters to her, i. 486, n. 1;
    portrait, ii. 362, n. 1; iv. 229, n. 4, 421, n. 2;
  miniatures, paints, i. 326;
    oil-painting, ib., n. 7; iv. 229, n. 4;
  Montagu, Mrs., paints, iii. 244;
  politician, no, ii. 317, n. 2;
  purity of mind, i. 486, n. 1; ii. 362, n. 1;
  mentioned, iii. 82, 215, 319-20, 390, 434.
REYNOLDS, Sir Joshua, Abington's, Mrs., benefit, ii. 324;
  abused in a newspaper, iv. 29;
  Academy, influence in the, iv. 219, n. 4;
  amusement is the great end of all employments, ii. 234;
    a key to character, iv. 316;
  associates with men of all principles, iii. 375;
  Baretti's ignorance, gives an instance of, v. 121, n. 4;
    is a witness at his trial, ii. 97, n. 1;
  Barry quarrels with him, iv. 436, 438;
  Beattie, portrait of, v. 90, n. 1; v. 273, n. 4;
  books, judgments on, iii. 320;
  Boswell, bequest to, i. 11, n. 1;
    first acquaintance with, i. 417, n. 1;
    gives Johnson's portrait to, i. 392;
    letter from, iv. 259, n. 2;
    <i>Life of Johnson</i>, has a leaf cancelled in, ii. 2, n. 1;
    portrait, paints, i. 2, n. 2;
    visits, when ill, iii. 391;
  Burke's echo, ii. 222, n. 4;
    and Johnson on Bacon's Essays, iii. 194, n. 1;
    too much under, iii. 261;
    wit, v. 32, n. 3;
  Cambridge, Mr., dines with, ii. 361;
  Camden's, Lord, portrait, ii. 353, n. 2;
  <i>Cecilia</i>, iv. 223, n. 5;
  character drawn by Burke, i. 245, n. 3; v. 102, n. 3;
  colouring in conversation, iv. 183;
  conversation, his, i. 246;
  critics mostly pretenders, ii. 191, n. 1;
  Cumberland, dislikes, iv. 384, n. 2;
  'Dear Knight of Plympton,' iv. 432;
  death, i. 10;
  delicacy as regards Pope's note on Johnson, i. 143;
  delicate observer of manners, ii. 109; Devonshire, visits, i. 377;
  dinners at his house,
    gathering of literary men, iii. 65, 250, 317, 337, 381;
iv. 78, 332, 337;
    Northcote's description of them, iii. 375, n. 2; iv. 312, n. 3;
  Discourses on Painting,
    Empress of Russia's testimony of a snuffbox, iii. 370;
    first volume published, in. 369;
    Johnson described in them, i. 245, n. 3;
      his dedication, ii. 2, n. 1;
      mentioned in an unfinished <i>Discourse</i>, iii. 369, n. 3;
      praises them, iv. 320;
    Rogers, Samuel, present at the last, iii. 369, n. 2;
    translated into Italian, iii. 96;
  Dyer, Samuel, portrait of, ii. 453, n. 2;
  emigration, iii. 232;
  eminence, the cause of, ii. 437, n. 2;
  Errol, Lord, portrait of, v. 102;
  Essex Head Club, declines to join the, iv. 254, 436;
    describes it, iv. 438;
  Eumelian Club, member of the, iv. 394, n. 4;
  Fox's praise of <i>The Traveller,</i>, mentions, iii. 252, 261;
    too much under, iii. 261;
  'furious purposes, his,' iv. 366;
  Garrick and the Literary Club, i. 480;
    tea, iii. 264, n. 4;
  Garrick, Mrs., dines with, iv. 96-9;
  genius, account of, ii. 437, n. 2;
  Goldsmith's company, likes, ii. 235;
    criticised at his table, ii. 28l, n. 1;
    debts, ii. 280;
    dedicates the <i>Deserted Village</i> to him, ii. 1, n. 2, 217, n. 5;
    epitaph, loses the copy of, iii. 82;
    fable of the little fishes, ii. 231;
    monument, chooses the spot for, iii. 83, n. 2;
    rebuked by, v. 273, n, 4;
    <i>She Sloops to Conquer</i>, suggests a name for, ii. 205, n. 4;
    to Walpole, introduces, iv. 314, n. 3;
  Hawkesworth's character, i. 253, n. 1;
  Hawkins's character, i. 28, n. 1;
  hospitality, his, i. 1;
  Humphry, the painter, assists, iv. 269, n. 2;
  <i>Idler</i>, contributes to the, i. 330;
  illness in 1764, i. 486;
  imaginary praise of him, iv. 18;
  inoffensiveness, v. 102, n. 3;
  invulnerability, i. 2; v. 102;
  Italy, returns from, i. 165, 242, n. 6;
  Johnson, admiration for, i. 245;
    admiration of Burke, ii. 450;
    altercation with Dean Barnard, iv. 431;
    apologises for his rudeness, iii. 329;
    arguing, ii. 100, n. 1;
      'flew upon an argument,' ii. 365;
    belabours his confessor, iv. 281;
    bequest to him, iv. 402, n. 2;
    checked immorality in talk, iv. 295, n. 3;
    in a company of booksellers, iii. 311;
    conversation, i. 204; iv. 184-5;
    convulsive starts, i. 144;
    cups of tea, i. 313, n. 3;
    desire for reconciliation, ii. 100, n. 1, 109;
    <i>Dictionary</i>, cited in, iv. 4. n. 3;
    <i>dulce decus</i>, i. 244;
    dying requests, iv. 413;
    executor, iv. 402, n. 2;
    feared by a nobleman, iv. 116, n. 2;
    feelings towards foreigners, iv. 169, n. 1;
    fond of discrimination, ii. 306;
      overcharges characters, iii. 332;
    French, ii. 404;
    friendship with, i. 2, 242, n. 6, 244, 246; iv. 367;
      in 1764 almost—only friend, i. 486;
    friendship for Taylor, iii. 180;
    on friendship, i. 300;
    funeral, iv. 419, n. 1;
    garret, i. 328, n. 1;
    gestures, v. 18;
    interview with George III, ii. 34, n. i, 41;
    intoxicated, i. 379, n. 2;
    introduces Crabbe to, iv. 175, n. 2;
    letters to him: See JOHNSON, letters;
    letter to Thurlow, copies, iv. 349. n. 2, 368;
    lines in <i>The Traveller</i>, ii. 6, n. 3;
    making himself agreeable to ladies, iv. 73;
    as a member of parliament, ii. 138;
    mind ready for use, ii. 365, n. 1;
    mode of covering his ignorance, v. 124, n. 4;
    monument, iv. 423, n. 1;
      inscription, ib., n. 2, 445;
    never wrote a line a saint would blot, iv. 295, n. 3;
    his obligation to, i. 245, n. 3;
    on painting, i. 128, n. 2;
    pension, i. 374;
      proposed addition to it, iv. 327-8, 336-9, 348, 367-8;
    pride, no meanness in it, iv. 429, n. 3;
    proud of Reynolds's approbation, iv. 368;
    portraits: See under JOHNSON;
    prejudice against foreigners, iv. 15, n. 3;
    prejudices and obstinacy, i. 293, n. 1;
    pride, iii. 345, n. 1;
    quarrel with Dr. Warton, ii. 41, n. 1;
    <i>Rambler</i>, origin of the name, i. 202;
    readiness for a reconciliation, ii. 100, n, 1, 256, n. 1;
    'rough as winter, mild as summer,' iv. 396, n. 3;
    rudeness partly due to his truthfulness, iv. 221, n. 2;
    and Savage in St. James's Square, i. 164;
    'school,' one of, i. 7, n. 1, 245, n. 3; iii. 230,261, n. 1, 369;
      influenced his writings, i. 222;
      qualified his mind to think, iii. 369, n. 3;
      'Reynolds's oracle,' i. 245, n. 3;
    <i>Shakespeare</i>, i. 319, n. 4;
    talking to a 'blackguard boy,' iv. 184;
    and Thrale's copper, i. 363, n. 3;
    <i>Tracts</i>, his copy of, ii. 315, n. 2;
    trip to Devonshire with, i. 377; iv. 322;
    truth sacred to, ii. 433, n. 1;
    unsuspicious of hypocrisy, i. 418, n. 3; iii. 444;
    vocation to public life, iv. 359;
    watch over himself, iv. 396, n. 3;
    writings, 'won't read,' ii. 317, n. 2;
  <i>Johnsoniana</i>, his, iv. 182;
  <i>Journey to Flanders</i>, iv. 423, n. 2;
  knighted, i. 103, n. 3;
  Leicester Fields, house in, ii. 384;
  liberality, iv. 133;
  literary characters, a nobleman's terror of, i. 450, n. 1;
  Literary Club, founder of the, i. 477;
    attendance at it, ii. 17; iii. 128, n. 4, 230, n. 5;
  London, loves, iii. 178, n. 1;
  Lowe, the painter, iv. 202, n. 1;
  <i>Macbeth</i>, note on, v. 129;
  Malone one of his executors, iv. 133;
    <i>Shakespeare</i>, praises, v. 129, n. 1;
  matrimonial wishes about him, iv. 161, n. 5;
  militia camps, visits the, iii. 365;
  modesty, unaffected, iv. 133;
  Monckton's, Miss, at, iv. 108, n. 4;
  Montagu's, Mrs., <i>Essay</i>, likes, ii. 88-9; v. 245;
  Morris, Miss, picture of, iv. 417, n. 3;
  Moser, Keeper of the Academy, eulogium on, iv. 227, n. 4;
  <i>Muddy</i>, ii. 362, n. 3;
  Mudge, Rev. Mr., influenced by the, i. 378, n. 3;
    <i>Sermons</i>, praises, iv. 98;
  obligations, the relief from, i. 246;
  observant in passing through life, iv. 6;
  Oxford degree of D.C.L., v. 90, n. 1;
  painter to the King, iv. 366, n. 2, 368, n. 3;
  paralytic attack, iv. 161, n. 5;
  Parr's defence of Johnson, iv. 422;
  persuaded, easily, v. 286;
  pictures, runs to, ii. 365;
  placidity, i. 1;
  planet, always under some, iii. 261;
  players, defends, ii. 234-5;
  Pope's hand, touches, i. 377, n. 1;
  portrait of himself holding his ear in his hand, iii. 273, n. 1;
    at Streatham, iv. 158, n. 1;
  price of portraits and income, i. 326, 363, 370, 382;
  professor in the imaginary college, v. 109;
  prosperity, not to be spoilt by, v. 102, n. 3;
  Reviews, wonders to find so much good writing in the, iii. 44;
  Richardson's talk, iv. 28;
  'rival, without a,' i. 363;
  round of pleasures, in a, ii. 274, n. 3;
  Round Robin, signs the, iii. 83;
    carries it to Johnson, iii. 84;
  Royal Academy, intends to resign the presidency of the, iv. 366, n. 2;
  same all the year round, iii. 5, 192;
  <i>Savage, The Life of</i>, reads, i. 165, 245;
  Shelburne, Lord, portrait of, iv. 174, n. 5;
  Siddons, Mrs., portrait of, iv. 242, n. 2;
  sister, dislikes the paintings by his, i. 326, n. 7; iv. 229, n. 4;
  Smith's, Adam, talk, iv. 24, n. 2;
  St. Paul's, proposes monuments in, iv. 423, n. 2;
  Streatham library, pictures by him in, iv. 158, n. 1;
  Suard visits him, iv. 20, n. 1;
  Sunday painting, iv. 414;
  taste, taking the altitude of a man's, iv. 316;
    how acquired, ii. 191, n. 1;
  Thurlow, letter from, iv. 350, n. 1;
  titles, in addressing people did not use, i. 245, n. 3;
  truthfulness of his stories, ii. 433, n. 2;
  understanding, judging a man's, iv. 316;
  Vanburgh, defends, iv. 55;
  Vesey's, Mr., at, iii. 425;
  virtue in itself preferable to vice, iii. 342, 349;
  Voltaire, supposed attack on, v. 273, n. 4;
  weather, ridicules the influence of, i. 332, n. 2;
  wine, defends the use of, iii. 41;
    his fondness for it, ii. 292; iii. 329-30;
    reproached by Johnson with being far gone, iii. 329;
  mentioned, ii. 82, 83, n. 2, 232, 265, n. 4, 347; iii. 43, 301,
305, 386, 390, 434; iv. 1, n. 1, 32, 76, 84, 88, 159, 178,
219, n. 3, 224, n. 2, 334, 341, 344, 355, n. 4; v. 215.
<i>Rhedi de generations insectarum</i>, iii. 229, n. 4.
RHEES, David ap, <i>Welsh Grammar</i>, v. 443.
RHEUMATISM, medicine for it, ii. 361.
<i>Rhodochia</i>, i. 223.
RHONE, iv. 277.
RHOPALIC VERSES, v. 269, n. 3.
RHYME, essential to English poetry, iii. 257.
  See BLANK-VERSE.
RICCOBONI, Mme.,
  credulity of the English, v. 330, n. 3;
  French and English stage in point of decency, ii. 50, n. 3;
  sentimentalists of Paris, iii. 149, n. 2;
  want of respect to nobility on the English stage, v. 106, n. 4.
RICH, the manager of Covent Garden Theatre,
  brings out the <i>Beggar's Opera</i>, iii. 321, n. 3;
  'is this your tragedy or comedy?' iv. 246, n. 5;
  refuses a play in false English, iii. 259.
RICHARD II, iv. 268, n. 2.
RICHARDS, John, R.A., iii. 464.
RICHARDS, Thomas, i. 186, n. 3.
RICHARDSON, Jonathan, the elder, <i>Treatise on Painting</i>, i. 128, n. 2.
RICHARDSON, Jonathan, the younger, i. 128, 142.
RICHARDSON, Samuel,
  Chesterfield's estimate of him, ii. 174, n. 2;
  Cibber, respects, ii. 93; iii. 184;
  <i>Clarissa</i>, German translation of, iv. 28;
    Lovelace's character, ii. 341;
  Cowley out of fashion, iv. 102, n. 2;
  death, i. 370, 382;
  <i>Familiar Letters</i>—description of a visit to Bedlam, ii. 374, n. 1;
    and the procession to Tyburn, iv. 189, n. 1;
  Fielding, compared with, ii. 49, 174, ib., n. 2;
    disparages, ii. 49, 174, 175, n. 2;
  Fielding, Miss, letter to, ii. 49, n. 2, 174, n. 1;
  flattery, love of, v. 396, n. 1, 440, n. 2;
  foreigners, read by, ii. 49, n. 2;
  Hanoverian, a, i. 146, n. 1;
  Johnson asks for an index for <i>Clarissa</i>, ii. 175, n. 1;
    <i>Dictionary</i>, cited in, iv. 4;
    draws his character, v. 395;
    gives him a pheasant, i. 326;
    letters to him; i. 303, n. 1; ii. 175, n. 1;
    meets Hogarth at his house, i. 145;
      and Young, v. 269;
    sought after him, iii. 314;
    under arrest, helps, i. 303, n. 1;
  King, Dr. W., a Jacobite speech by, i. 146, n. 1;
  literary ladies, his, iv. 246, n. 6; v. 396;
  Macaulay's high praise of him, ii. 174, n. 2;
  Nelson, Robert, the original of Sir Charles Grandison, ii. 458, n. 3;
  novels, his, compared with the French, ii. 125;
  Oxford University, the Jacobitism of, i. 281, n. 1;
  portrait, i. 434, n. 3;
  <i>Rambler</i>, praised in the, i. 203;
    praises it, i. 209, n. 1;
    contributes to it, i. 203;
  read for the sentiment, not story, ii. 175;
  <i>rear</i>, Johnson can make him, iv. 28;
  talks of his own works, iv. 28;
  Tunbridge Wells, at, i. 190, n. 1;
  vanity, iv. 28, n. 7; v. 396;
  Walpole's, Horace, contempt of him, ii. 174, n. 2;
  Williams, Mrs., visits him, i. 232, n. 1.
RICHARDSON, William, i. 303, n. 1.
RICHELIEU, Cardinal, ii. 134, n. 4.
RICHES. See MONEY.
RICHMOND, third Duke of,
  attacks Lord Sandwich and Miss Ray, iii. 383, n. 3;
  discusses history and poetry, ii. 366, n. 1;
  libelled by Henry Bate, iv. 296, n. 3.
RIDDELL, Mr., of the Horse Grenadiers, iv. 211, n. 1.
RIDDOCH, Rev. Mr., v. 87, 91, 95-96.
RIDICULE,
  abuse of it, iv. 17;
  Johnson defends its use, iii. 379.
<i>Riding</i>, the, i. 36, n. 4.
RIDLEY, the bookseller, iii. 325.
RIGBY, Richard, iii. 76, n. 2.
<i>Rio verde, Rio verde</i>, ii. 212, n. 4.
RIOT ACT, iii. 46, n. 5.
RIOTS,
  Franklin's description of the street riots in 1768, iii. 46, n. 5;
  Gordon riots in 1780, iii. 46, n. 5, 428;
  St. George's Fields in 1768, iii. 46, n. 5.
RISEN IN THE WORLD, jealousy of men who have, iii. 2.
RISING early, its difficulty, iii. 168.
RITTER, Joseph, Boswell's Bohemian servant,
  accompanies Boswell to the Hebrides, v. 53, 74, 76, 83,163, 286,
318, 363, 371;
  mentioned, ii. 103, 411; iii. 216.
RIVERS, Earl, Savage's reputed father, i. 166, n. 4, 170, 172.
RIVINGTON, Mr., the bookseller, i. 135, n. 1.
RIZZIO, David, v. 43.
ROADS,
  described by Arthur Young, iii. 135, n. 1;
  toll gates, v. 56, n. 2.
  See under SCOTLAND, roads.
ROBERT BRUCE, ii. 386-7.
ROBERT II, v. 373.
ROBERTS, J., the bookseller, i. 165, 175. n. 3.
ROBERTS, Mr., Register of Bangor, v. 447, 452.
ROBERTS, Miss, old Mr. Langton's niece, i. 336; 430.
ROBERTSON, Mr., of Cullen, v. 110, 111.
ROBERTSON, Mr., a publisher, of Edinburgh, iv. 129.
ROBERTSON, Professor James, v. 42.
ROBERTSON, Dr. William, Beattie, compared with, ii. 195, n. 1;
  Boswell appears against him in Court, ii. 381, n. 1;
    letters to, v. 15, 32;
  <i>Charles V</i>,
    criticised by Wesley, ii. 236, n. 4;
    price offered for it, ii. 63, n. 2;
  Clive's character, expatiates on, iii. 334;
  companionable and fond of wine, iii. 335;
  conversation, iii. 339, n. 1;
  Elibank, Lord, his early patron, v. 386;
  Gibbon, complimented by, ii. 236, n. 3;
  <i>Histories</i>, his, romances, ii. 237;
    pictures, but not likenesses, iii. 404;
  <i>History of America</i>, iii. 270;
  <i>History of Greece</i>, projects a, ii. 237, n. 4;
  <i>History of Scotland</i>, Johnson 'won't talk of it,' ii. 53;
    published in 1759, iv. 78, n. 2;
    sale, iii. 334;
    £6000 made by the publishers, ib.;
    editions, ib., n. 2;
    mentioned, ii. 270;
  Johnson, awe of, ii. 63; iii. 332; v. 371;
    criticises his <i>History</i> and style, ii. 236-7; v. 57, n. 3;
    estimation of him, ii. 30, n. 1; v. 397;
    introduced to, iii. 331;
    asks him to translate the <i>Iliad</i>, iii. 333;
    dines with him in Boswell's house, v. 32-4;
    breakfasts, v. 38-9;
    shows him St. Giles, v. 41;
      the College, v. 42;
      Holyrood, v. 43;
    dines with him, v. 44;
    welcomes him on his return, v. 392;
    'love' for him, ii. 53;
    proposed tour to the Hebrides, writes about, ii. 232;
    refusal to hear Scotch preachers, iii. 336; v. 121;
    style, recognises, i. 308;
      imitates it, iii. 173; iv. 388;
    worship, complains of, iii. 331;
  liberality of sentiment, v. 393;
  packs his gold in wool, ii. 237;
  paraphrased other people's thoughts, v. 397, n. 3;
  party in the church, his, v. 213;
  preferment, his church, iii. 334, n. 2;
  Principal of Edinburgh College, v. 41, n. 2;
  romantic  humour, his, iii. 335;
  Southey calls him a rogue, ii. 238, n. 1;
  style, i. 439, n. 2; ii. 236-7;
    corrected by Strahan, v. 92, n. 3;
  <i>verbiage</i>, ii. 236;
  Voltaire's <i>Louis XIV</i>, v. 393;
  Whist, learns, v. 404, n. 1;
  mentioned, ii. 66, 275, 354, n. 4; iii. 278.
ROBIN HOOD, v. 389.
ROBIN ROY, v. 127, n. 3.
ROBINHOOD SOCIETIES, account of them, iv. 92, n. 5;
  Boswell attends one, iv. 95.
ROBINSON, H.C., account of Capel Lofft, iv. 278, n. 3;
  Bishop Hampden's 'confirmation,' iv. 323, n. 3;
  Burncy's account of Johnson, i. 410, n. 2.
ROBINSON, Sir Thomas, account of him, i. 434;
  Chesterfield sends him to Johnson, i. 259, n. 2;
  talks the language of a savage, ii. 130.
<i>Robinson Crusoe</i>, i. 71, n. 1; ii. 238, n. 5; iii. 268.
ROCHEFORT, expedition to, i. 321.
ROCHEFOUCAULD, i. 246.
ROCHESTER, Mr. Colson,
  master of the Free School, i. 101, n. 3;
    Johnson visits it, iv. 8, n. 3, 22, 232-3.
ROCHESTER, Wilmot, second Earl of, Flatman,
  verses upon, iii. 29;
  <i>Imitations</i> of Horace, i. 118, n. 5; v. 52, n. 5;
  <i>Letter from Artemisia</i>, iii. 386, n. 4;
  <i>Life</i> by Burnet, iii. 191;
  <i>Poems</i>, castration of his, iii. 191;
  wrote short pieces iv. 370, n. 1.
ROCHFORD, Earl of, i. 317.
ROCKINGHAM, Marquis of,
  his ministry, iii. 224, n. 1; iv. 170, n. 1;
    Burke's advice about it, ii. 355, n. 2;
  his party, ii. 181.
<i>Rockingham, Memoirs of</i>, iii. 460.
ROD, use of the, i. 46; v. 99.
<i>Roderick Random</i>. See SMOLLETT.
RODNEY, Sir George, ii. 398.
ROGERS, Rev. Mr., of Berkley, iv. 402, n. 2.
ROGERS, Rev. Mr., <i>Sermons</i>, i. 89, n. 3.
ROGERS, Samuel, Beauclerk's absence of mind, i. 249, n. 1;
  Beckford's speech to the King, iii. 201, n. 3;
  Fitzpatrick and Hare, iii. 388, n. 3;
  Fordyce's, Dr., intemperance, ii. 274, n. 6;
  Fox's conversation, iv. 167, n. 1;
    on Burnet's style, ii. 213, n. 2;
    love of Homer, iv. 218, n. 3;
    and the wicked Lord Lyttelton, iv. 298, n. 3;
    and Mrs. Sheridan, i. 390, n. 1;
  heads on Temple Bar, ii. 238, n. 3;
  Hume and his opponents, ii. 441, n. 5;
  Johnson, wishes to call on, i. 247, n. 3;
    and Lady Lucan, iii. 425, n. 3;
  Marley, Dean, iv. 73, n. 1;
  Mounsey, Dr., ii. 64, n. 2;
  Murphy, Arthur, i. 356, n. 2;
  Piozzi, Signor, iv. 339, n. 2;
  Price, Dr., iv. 434;
  <i>Rambler</i>, i. 210, n. 1;
  Reynolds's last lecture, iii. 369, n. 2;
  Shelburne and Carlisle, Earls of, iv. 246, n. 5;
  Wilkes as City Chamberlain, iv. 101, n. 2;
  Williams, Miss H.M., iv. 282, n. 3;
  Wordsworth and the <i>Edinburgh Review</i>, iv. 115, n. 2.
ROKEBY, Lord, i. 434, n. 3.
ROKEBY HALL, i. 434, n. 3.
<i>Rolliad, The</i>, Fitzpatrick, partly written by, iii. 388;
  Graham, Lord, ridiculed, iii. 382, n. 1;
  humorous but scurrilous, i. 116, n. 1;
  'Painful pre-eminence,' iii. 82, n. 2.
<i>Rollin's Ancient History</i>, iv. 311.
ROLT, Richard,
  <i>Dictionary of Trade and Commerce</i>, i. 358; ii. 344;
  <i>Universal Visitor</i>, wrote for the, ii. 345;
  vanity and impudence, his, i. 359.
ROMAN CATHOLICISM and Roman Catholics,
  attacked by Wesley, v. 35, n. 3;
  clergy accused of lazy devotion, v. 170, n. 1;
  Communion in one kind, ii. 105; iv. 289;
  convicts should be attended by a Popish priest, iv. 329;
  converts part with nothing, ii. 105;
    not interrogated strictly, iv. 289;
  doctrines and practice, ii. 105;
  England and Ireland, in, ii. 255, n. 3;
  Gordon Riots, iii. 428-431;
  good timorous men, suited to, iv. 289; and women, ib.;
  gross corruptions, iii. 17;
  James II's attempt to bring England over to it, ii. 341;
  Johnson attacks it, iii. 407;
    calls their chapel a mass-house, iii. 429, n. 2;
    defends it, i. 465, 476; iv. 289;
    prefers it to Presbyterianism, ii. 103;
    respects it, ii. 105;
  laity and the Bible, ii. 27;
  'old religion, the,' ii. 105;
  penal laws relaxed, iii. 427-8;
    still in force, iii. 427, n. 1;
  Popish books burnt in 1784, ib.;
  Popery understood by the nation, v. 276, n. 4;
  Presbyterianism, differs chiefly in form from, ii. 150;
  priests and people deceived, iii. 17;
  transubstantiation, v. 71.
<i>Roman Gazetteers</i>, i. 147, n. 4.
ROMANCES, fit for youth, iv. 16, n. 3;
  historically valuable, iv. 17;
  Johnson loved the old ones, i. 49; iii. 2.
ROME and the Romans, ancient, barbarians mostly, ii. 170;
  Bolingbroke's references to them, iii. 206, n. 1;
  cant in their praise, i. 311; iii. 206, n. 1;
  Carthaginian, no feeling for a, iv. 196;
  empire, iii. 36;
  fountain of elegance, iii. 333;
  'Happy to come, happy to depart,' v. 82;
  known of them, very little, ii. 153;
  secession to <i>Mons Sacer</i>, v. 142, n. 2;
  Senate, iii. 206;
  temples built by Saurus and Batrachus, iv. 446;
  Tiber, its duration compared with that of the, iii. 251.
ROME, modern,
  Johnson eager to see it, iii. 19;
    expected there, iv. 326, n. 3;
  licensed stews, iii. 17;
  <i>London</i>,
    mentioned in, i. 119;
  pilgrimages to it, iii. 446;
  mentioned, iii. 217; v. 153, n. 1.
ROMILLY, Sir Samuel,
  capital punishments, iv. 328, n. 1;
  Hume and the French atheists, ii. 8, n. 4;
  Parr, letter from, iv. 15, n. 5;
  Robinhood Societies, iv. 92, n. 5;
  Windham's opposition to good measures, iv. 200, n. 4.
ROMNEY, George,
  Cumberland's <i>Odes</i> dedicated to him, iii. 43, n. 4.
ROPE DANCING, ii. 440.
RORIE MORE. See SIR RODERICK MACLEOD.
<i>Rosamond</i>, v. 376, n. 3.
<i>Roscommon, Life of</i>, i. 192.
ROSE, Dr., i. 46, n. 1; iv. 168, n. 1.
<i>Rosicrucian Infallible Axiomata</i>, iv. 402, n. 2.
Ross, Professor, of Aberdeen, v. 90, 92.
Ross,—, a soldier, v. 197.
ROSSLYN, Earl of. See LOUGHBOROUGH, Lord.
ROTHERAM, John, <i>Origin of Faith</i>, ii. 478.
ROTHES, Countess Dowagers of, ii. 136, n. 3.
ROTHES, Lady,
  Bennet Langton's wife, ii. 77, n. 1, 142, 146; iii. 104, 368;
iv. 8, n. 3, 146, 159, n. 3, 240.
ROTTERDAM, iii. 84, n. 2.
ROUBILIAC, i. 328, n. 1.
ROUGHNESS, breedeth hate, iv. 168, n. 2.
ROUND ROBIN, The, iii. 83-5.
ROUS, FRANCIS, i. 75, n. 3.
ROUSSEAU, J.J.,
  beating time, iv. 283, n. 1;
  Boswell, sympathy with, ii. 11, n. 3;
    visits him, ii. 12, 215;
  <i>Contrat-Social</i>, ii. 249, n. 2;
  coxcomb and cynic, v. 378, n. 1;
  exile and visit to England, ii. 11;
  Foundling Hospital, put his children into the, ii. 398, n. 4;
  French not a gay people, ii. 402, n. 1;
  Geneva, first departure from, i. 58, n. 2;
  Goldsmith, resemblance to, i. 413, n. 1;
  Hume on Rousseau's heroes, the Greeks and Romans, i. 353, n. 2;
  inequality of mankind, i. 439;
  Johnson's character of him, ii. 11;
  justification of himself, ii. 12, n. 2;
  liberty of teaching, opposed to, ii, 249, n. 2;
  novelty, love of, i. 441;
  pension from George III, ii. 12, n. 1;
  <i>Profession de Foi du Vicaire Savoyard</i>, ii. 12;
  read less than formerly, iv. 288;
  savage life, preference of, ii. 12;
  talked nonsense well, ii. 74;
  untruthfulness, ii. 434, n. 2;
  Voltaire, compared with, ii. 12;
  want of readiness, ii. 256, n. 3;
  writings, effect of his, ii. 11.
ROWE, Elizabeth, i. 312.
ROWE, Nicholas,
  an indecent poem included in his <i>Works</i>, iv. 36, n. 4;
  Johnson's memory of his plays, iv. 36, n. 3.
ROWLANDSON, Thomas,
  caricature of <i>Boswell revising the Second Edition</i>, v. 148, n. 1.
<i>Rowley's Poetry</i>. See CHATTERTON.
ROYAL ACADEMY,
  Boswell Secretary for Foreign Correspondence, ii. 67, n. 1;
    his letters of acceptance of office, iii. 370, 462-4;
    and Robertson at the Exhibition, iii. 278;
  club-nights, ii. 97, n. 1;
  dinners,
    Goldsmith, Johnson, Reynolds and Walpole present, iv. 314, n. 3;
    Goldsmith, Johnson and Walpole, talk about Chatterton, iii. 51, n. 2;
    Johnson speaks Latin to a Frenchman at dinner, ii. 404;
      in 1780 sits over against an Archbishop, iv. 198, n. 2;
      in 1784 has a race upon the stairs, iv. 355;
      is kept waiting by the Prince of Wales, iv. 270, n. 2;
  Exhibition of 1780, ii. 400, n. 3; iv. 198, n. 2;
  Johnson's monument, subscription to, iv. 423, n. 2;
    intercession for Lowe's picture, iv. 201-3;
  minister, not dependent on a, iii. 464;
  Moser, the keeper, iv. 227, n. 4;
  origin, its, i. 363, n. 2;
  professors and secretaries, ii. 67; iv. 220;
  Reynolds's influence in it, iv. 219, n. 4;
    his intention to resign the presidency, iv. 366, n. 2;
  travelling students, iv. 202, n. 1.
ROYAL FAMILY, Johnson's dedications, ii. 2, 225;
  unpopular, ii. 234.
ROYAL MARRIAGE BILL, ii. 152.
<i>Royal Recollections</i>, i. 116, n. 1.
ROYAL SOCIETY, Dryden's lines, ii. 241;
  Johnson improves the method of the <i>Philosophical Transactions</i>,
ii. 40, n. 2;
  Presidents—Earl of Macclesfield, i. 267, n. 1;
    Sir John Pringle, iii. 65, n. 1;
  mentioned, iv. 92, n. 5.
RUDD, Mrs., account of her, ii. 450, n. 1;
  Boswell's acquaintance with her, iii. 79;
  approved by Johnson, iii. 79, 80, 330.
RUDDIMAN, Thomas, Boswell projects his <i>Life</i>, ii. 216;
  Johnson's regard for him, i. 211;
  Laurence Kirk, projected monument at, v. 75;
  Librarian of Advocates' Library, ii. 216;
  'Ruddiman is dead,' ii. 21;
  mentioned, iii. 372.
RUFFHEAD, Owen, <i>Life of Pope</i>, ii. 166; iv. 50, n. 1.
RUFFLES, laced, iv. 80.
RUINS, artificial, v. 456.
RUNDEL, Bishop, ii. 283, n. 2; iv. 29, n. 1.
<i>Runick Inscription</i>, i. 156, n. 3.
<i>Runts</i>, iii. 337.
RUSKIN, Mr. John, anecdote of Northcote, i. 377, n. 1;
  <i>Bibliotheca Pastorum</i>, iii. 94, n. 2;
  New Town of Edinburgh, v. 68, n. 1.
RUSSELL, Alexander, <i>Natural History of Aleppo</i>, i. 309; iv. 171.
RUSSELL, Lady, ii. 210, n. 3.
RUSSELL, Lord William, ii. 210.
RUSSIA, alchymist, a Russian, ii. 377;
  Beauclerk's library offered to the ambassador, iii. 420;
  Bell's <i>Travels</i>, ii. 55;
  Lapouchin's, Mme., punishment, iii. 340;
  population increasing, ii. 101;
  rising in power, ii. 127, n. 4;
  mentioned, ii. 131, n. 2:
  See CATHERINE II.
RUSTIC HAPPINESS AND VIRTUE, iv. 175; v. 293.
RUTLAND, Duchess of, iv. 224, n. 1.
RUTLAND, Roger, Earl of, i. 431.
RUTTY, Dr., account of him, iii. 170, n. 4;
  extracts from his <i>Diary</i>, iii. 170-2.
RYLAND, Mr.,
  Johnson's friend in 1752, i. 242;
    letters to him: See under JOHNSON, letters;
  member of the Essex Head Club, iv. 360;
    and Ivy Lane Club, iv. 435.
RYMER, Thomas, i. 498, n. 4; ii. 444, n. 2.
RYSWICK, peace of, iii. 446.</p>

<h3>S.</h3>

<p id="id00863" style="margin-left: 0%; margin-right: 0%">SABBATH. See SUNDAY.
SACHEVERELL, Rev. Dr. Henry,
  Johnson heard him preach at Lichfield, i. 39;
  sale of his <i>Trial</i>, i. 34, n 5.
SACHEVERELL, W.,
  <i>Account of the Isle of Man</i>, v. 309, n. 1, 336.
SACRAMENT,
  preparation for it, iv. 122;
  in one kind, ii. 105.
  See under JOHNSON.
SADNESS. 'Sadness only multiplies self,' iii. 136, n. 2.
SAGACITY, iv. 335.
SAILORS,
  estimation in which they are held, iii. 265-6;
  generosity, v. 400;
  Johnson's description of their life, i. 348; ii. 438; iii. 266;
iv. 250; v. 137;
  mortality among them, i. 348, n. 3; iii. 266, n. 2;
  noble animal, v. 400;
  riot in London, iii. 46, n. 5;
  rudeness, i. 378, n. 1.
SAINT MARTIN, iii. 36, n. 2; iv. 374, n. 5.
SAINTS,
  Invocation of the, ii. 105, 255; iii. 407; iv. 289;
  resurrection of the bodies of the, iv. 95.
SALAMANCA, University of, i. 455; ii. 479.
SALE, <i>avoiding</i> a, v. 321.
SALE, George, iii. 424, n. 1.
SALISBURY, iv. 233, 237.
SALISBURY, Bishop of. See Rev. Dr. DOUGLAS.
SALLUST, characters, his, ii. 79;
  Catiline's character, i. 32;
  Johnson takes a copy on his tour in Scotland, v. 122;
    translates part of the <i>De Bella Catilinario</i>, iv. 381, n. 1;
  quoted, ii. 181, n. 2;
  translation by a Spanish prince, iv. 195.
SALMASIUS, iv. 444.
SALONICA, iv. 364, n. 2.
SALT HILL, v. 458, n. 5.
SALTER, Dr., i. 190, n. 5.
SALUSBURY FAMILY, v. 435, n. 2.
SALUSBURY, H.L., afterwards Mrs. Thrale and Mrs. Piozzi, i. 492.
SALUSBURY, Lady, v. 276.
SALUSBURY, Mr., Mrs. Thrale's father, v. 438, n. 5.
SALUSBURY, Mrs., Mrs. Thrale's mother, her death, ii. 263;
  saying about Johnson and runts, iii. 337.
SALUSBURY, Mr., iv. 343, n. 4.
SALVATION,
  divine intimation of acceptance, iii. 295;
  conditional, iv. 278, 299.
<i>Samson Agonistes</i>, i. 231, n. 2.
SANADON'S <i>Horace</i>, iii. 74, n. 1.
SANCROFT, Archbishop, iv. 287, n. 2.
SANDERSON, Robert, Bishop of Lincoln,
  Johnson's style partly formed on his, i. 219;
  use of the word <i>polluted</i>, iv. 402, n. 2;
  mentioned, iv. 406, n. 1.
SANDFORD, Mr., v. 263.
SANDS, MURRAY, and COCHRAN,
  printers of Edinburgh, i. 210, n. 3.
SANDWICH, fourth Earl of,
  confounded with Bishop Seeker, i. 508;
  disposal of a crown living, iv. 296, n. 3;
  Fox's motion for his removal, iii. 383, n. 3;
  Hawkesworth and Cook's <i>Voyages</i>, ii. 247, n. 5;
  Ray, Miss, iii. 383, n. 3.
SANDYS, second Lord, Johnson visits him, v. 455;
  portrait of him at Streatham, iv. 158, n. 1.
SANDYS, Sir Edwin, <i>View of the State of Religion</i>, i. 219.
SANDYS, George, <i>Travels</i>, iv. 311.
SANDYS, Samuel, the 'Motionmaker,' i. 509.
SANQUHAR, Lord, v. 103, n. 2.
SANSTERRE THE BREWER, ii. 396.
SAPPER, Thomas, iv. 358, n. 2.
SAPPHO IN OVID, ii. 181.
SARDINIA, Island of, its <i>lingua rustica</i>, ii. 82.
SARDINIA, Charles Emmanuel III, King of, death, iv. 325, n. 1.
SARPEDON, v. 103, n. 1.
SARPI, Father Paul, i. 135, 136;
  dying prayer, i. 478, n. 3;
  <i>Life</i> by Johnson, i. 139; v. 67, n. 2.
<i>Sartum tectum</i>, ii. 417.
<i>Sassenach More</i>, ii. 267, n. 2.
SASTRES, Signor, the Italian master,
  Johnson's bequest to him, iv. 402, n. 2;
    letters to him, iv. 368, <i>n</i>. 1, 374, n. 5;
  mentioned, iii. 22; iv. 405, n. 1.
SATISFACTION OF CHRIST, v. 88.
SAULT, Mr., iv. 200.
SAUNDERS, Dr., iii. 32, n. 5.
SAUNDERS, Prince, a negro, iv. 108, n. 4.
SAUNDERSON, Professor, ii. 190.
SAURIN, v. 42, n. 1, 47, n. 4.
SAURUS, iv. 446.
SAVAGE, Richard,
  account of him, i. 125, <i>n</i>. 4, 161-174;
  <i>Ad Ricardum Savage</i>, i. 162, n. 3;
  Addison's loan to Steele, iv. 53;
  author, an, without paper, i. 350, n. 3; iii. 115, n. 1;
  <i>Bastard, The</i>, i. 166;
  Caroline, Queen, gives him a yearly bounty, i. 125, n. 4;
  character and mode of life, i. 161-4, 166, n. 4, 173, 416, n. 1;
  correction for the press, iv. 321, n. 2;
  death, i. 156, n. 1, 164;
  dignity, asserted his, i. 77, n. 2;
  epitaph, i. 156, n. 3;
  equality of man, asserted the, ii. 479;
  evidence of his story examined, i. 170-4;
  Johnson gathers materials for his <i>Life</i>, i. 156;
    publishes it, i. 165;
    payment for it and editions, ib., n. 1;
    reviewed in <i>The Champion</i>, i. 169;
    wrote forty-eight pages at a sitting, i. 166; v. 67;
    intimacy with, i. 162-4;
    likeness to him, i. 166, n. 4;
    quotes <i>The Wanderer</i>, iv. 288
    virtue, impairs, i. 164; iv. 395;
  letter to a lord, i. 161, n. 3;
  life, knowledge of, iii. 237, n. 1;
  <i>On Public Spirit</i>, ii. 13, n. 1;
  oppressed by the booksellers, i. 305, n. 1;
  pension from Lord Tyrconnel, i. 372, n. 1;
  Reynolds reads his <i>Life</i>, i. 165;
  Sinclair, stabs: See below, trial for murder;
  <i>Sir Thomas Overbury</i> revived at Covent-Garden, iii. 115;
    its composition, ib., n. 1;
  subscribes to Husbands's <i>Miscellany</i>, i. 61, n. 3;
  subscription, lived on a, i. 125, n. 3;
  <i>Thales</i> of Johnson's <i>London</i>, i. 125, n. 4;
  Thomson, intimacy with, iii. 117, n. 7;
  trial for murder, i. 125, n. 4, 162, n. 3;
  vanity, ii. 281, n. 1;
  veracity, i. 170, n. 2;
  Wales, sets out for, i. 125, n. 4, 161, n. 2;
  Walpole's, Sir Robert, talk, iii. 57, n. 2;
  <i>Wanderer</i>, i. 124, n. 4.
<i>Savage, Life of</i>, an earlier one than Johnson's, i. 170.
SAVAGE GIRL, a, v. 110.
SAVAGES, affection, have no, iv. 210;
  Boswell's defence of savage life, ii. 73, 475; iv. 308;
  bread-tree, reported saying about the, ii. 248;
  compared with London shopkeepers, v. 81, 83;
  cruel always, i. 437;
  happiness of their life maintained by a learned gentleman, ii. 228;
  ignorant of the past, iii. 49;
  inferiority, their, v. 125;
  marriage state, ii. 165;
  Monboddo talks nonsense about them, ii. 74;
  and Rousseau, ii. 12, 74;
  saying attributed to one, iii. 180;
  superiority of civilised life, ii. 12, 73; v. 125, 365;
  traditions worthless, v. 225;
  wretches, who live willingly with them, iii. 246.
SAVILE, Sir George, iii. 428.
SAVILLE, Mr., saying about 'Ned' Waller, iii. 327, n. 2.
SAVINGS. See ECONOMY.
SAVOY, Duke of, Rousseau's anecdote of one, ii. 256, n. 3.
SAWBRIDGE, Alderman, Lord Mayor, iii. 459;
  bill for shortening duration of parliaments, iii. 460;
  mentioned, i. 242, n. 4; ii. 135, n. l.
SAWBRIDGE, Catherine (Mrs. Macaulay), i. 242, n. 4.
SAXON <i>k</i> added to the <i>c</i>, iv. 31.
SAXONS, iv. 133.
SCALIGERS, <i>The, Accurata Burdonum (i.e. Scaligerorum) Fabulae
Confutatio</i>, ii. 263, n. 5;
  Buchanan, praise, ii. 96; 'cum Scaligero errare,' ii. 444;
  Dictionary-makers, on, i. 296, n. 3;
  Johnson takes a motto from the <i>Poeticks</i>, i. 62;
  Lydiat, attacked by, i. 194, n. 2;
  Mantuan's <i>Bucolics</i>, complaint about, iv. 182, n. 1.
SCARBOROUGH, iii. 45, n. 1.
SCARSDALE, Lord, iii. 160-1.
SCEPTICISM, v. 47.
<i>Scheme for the Classes of a Grammar School</i>, i. 99.
<i>School for Scandal</i>. See SHERIDAN, R.B.
<i>Schools</i>, arguing in the, iv. 74.
SCHOOLS, authority lessened, iii. 262;
  Bolingbroke, described by, v. 85, n. 3
    (See under SCHOOLMASTERS);
  boys' restless desire of novelty, iii. 385, n. 1;
  flogging and learning, less of, ii. 407;
  happiness of schoolboys, i. 451;
  north of England schools cheap and good, ii. 380;
  poor, for the, ii. 188; iii. 352, n. 1;
  public, best for a boy of parts, iii. 12;
    bad for the timid, iv. 312;
    compared with private, ii-4O7; v. 85;
  studies not suited to all, iii. 385, n. 1.
SCHOOLMASTERS,
  described by Lord Cockburn, ii. 144, n. 2;
    by Johnson, ii. 146, n. 4;
    J.S. Mill, ib.;
    Steele, i. 44, n. 2;
  famous men, of, i. 43, n. 2;
  Johnson's writings about them, i. 97, n. 2, 98, n. 2;
  maimed boys, ii. 157;
  respect due to them, i. 97;
  Scotch masters—one criminally prosecuted, iii. 212, 214;
    one dismissed for barbarity: See under HASTIE;
  severity, how far lawful, ii. 146, 157, 183-5.
SCHOTANUS, i. 475.
<i>Sciolus</i>, iii. 341, n. 1; iv. 14, n. 2.
SCLAVONIC LANGUAGE, ii. 156.
<i>Sconces</i>, i. 59, n. 3.
<i>Score</i>, ii. 327, n. 2.
SCORPIONS, ii. 54.
SCOTLAND AND THE SCOTCH, [For the Hebrides and Highlands',
See immediately after SCOTLAND. See also in the Concordance of
Johnson's sayings at the end of the Index, SCOTCH and SCOTLAND]
  Aberbrothick, v. 71, 279;
  Aberdeen, Cathedral, v. 114, n. 2;
    English Church, v. 97, n. 5;
  Cromwell's soldiers, v. 84;
  duel fought for the honour of its butter, v. 342, n. 2;
  freedom given to English students, v. 90, n. 2;
  Infirmary, ii. 291;
  New Inn, v. 84;
  New Aberdeen, ib., n. 3;
  Old Aberdeen, v. 91; population in 1769, v. 90, n. 2;
    Town Hall, v. 90;
    Johnson made a freeman of the city, ii. 291; iii. 242; v. 90;
    no officer gaping for a fee, ib., n. 2;
    plaids, v. 85, n. 1;
    stocking-knitting, iii. 242; v. 86;
    University, education, v. 85, 92, n. 1;
      cost of it, v. 96, n. 1;
      English students, v. 85;
      Gray offered a doctor's degree, ii. 267, n. 1;
      King's College, iv. 265, n. 2; v. 90, n. 2, 91, n. 1;
      Malloch's poem on repairing the University, iv. 216;
      Marischal College, ii. 149, 264; v. 90;
      picture of Arthur Johnston, v. 95, n. 2;
      professors awed by Johnson, v. 92;
      'not a <i>mawkin</i> started,' v. 96;
      student from Col, v. 301;
      mentioned, iii. 362, 434, 436; v. 312;
  Aberdeenshire dialect, v. 84, 100;
  absence of 'a certain accommodation' in modern houses, v. 172;
  accent, i. 386;
  <i>Account of Scotland in</i> 1702, iii. 242;
  Advocate's admission <i>Thesis</i>, ii. 20;
  America, would not discover barrenness of, iii. 76;
  American war popular, iv. 259, n. 1;
  Athelstanford, iii. 47, n. 3; <i>Athol porridge</i>, iv. 78;
  Auchinleck, account of it, iii. 178; v. 379;
    Barony, ii. 413;
    Boswell's management, under, iv. 163;
    castle, ii. 270; v. 379; chapel,
    ancient, v. 380;
    <i>Field of Stones</i>, v. 55, 379;
    hornless cattle, v. 380;
    mansion, v. 379, n. 1;
    inscription on it, v. 381;
    Johnson desires to visit it, i. 462;
      visits it, v. 375-85;
    laird, past greatness of the, iii. 177;
      present glories, iii. 178;
    library, iv. 241; v. 376;
    Paoli visits it, v. 382, n. 2;
    pronounced Affléck, ii. 413; v. 116, n. 1;
    Reynolds's portrait of Johnson, v. 385, n. l;
    'rocks and woods of my ancestors,' ii. 69, n. 3; v. 348;
    <i>Via sacra</i>, v. 381;
  authors, ii. 53;
  authority lessened by the Scotch coming in, iii. 262;
  Ayr, v. 375, n. 3;
  Ayrshire, <i>cars</i>, v. 235;
    elections, ii. 169, n. 4;
    election petition, iv. 73;
    Johnson's argument, iv. 74;
      contest in 1773, v. 354;
    mentioned, v. 107, n. 1, 372;
  Balmerino, v. 406;
  Balmuto, v. 70;
  Banff, v. 109;
  bare-footed people, v. 55;
  beggars, v. 75, n. 1;
  Belhelvie, sands of, v. 101, n. 4;
  Blackshieids, v. 404;
  Blair in Ayrshire, iii. 47, n. 3;
  books printed before the Union, ii. 216;
  Boswell a Scotchman without the faults of one, iii. 347;
    Scotland too narrow a sphere for him, iii. 176;
  breakfasts, merit of Scotch, v. 123, n. 2;
  bring in other Scotch in their talk, ii. 242;
  broth, v. 87;
  Buchanan, Scotland's single man of genius, iv. 185;
  Buchanmen showing their teeth, v. 100;
  Buller of Buchan, v. 100;
  cabbage, introduction of the, ii. 455; v. 84, n. 3;
  Calder, v. 118;
    castle, v. 119;
  <i>Caledonian Mercury</i>, iv. 129; v. 323;
  career open in England, i. 387;
  Carron, The, v. 343, n. 3;
  castles, smallness of the, ii. 285; v. 374, n. 1;
  cattle without horns, v. 380;
  Charles I, sold, iv. 169;
  Christian Knowledge Society, ii. 27-30, 279;
  Church of Scotland <i>Book of Discipline</i>, ii. 172;
  churches dirty, v. 41-2;
    one clean one, v. 73, n. 4;
    in the Hebrides, v. 289, n. 1;
    church holidays not kept, ii. 459;
    form of prayers, absence of a, v. 365;
    Lord's Prayer omitted, v. 121, 365, n. 1;
    judicatures, ii. 242;
    practice at the bar of the General Assembly coarse, ii. 381, n. 1;
    'the Presbyterian <i>Kirk</i> has its General Assembly,' i. 464;
    probationer, case of a, ii. 171;
      lay-patrons, ii. 149;
        Johnson's argument on their rights, ii. 242-6;
    parties, two contending, v. 213;
  civility, persevering, iv. 11;
  'cleanliness, Scottish,' v. 21;
  clergy, assiduity, v. 251;
    card-playing, v. 404, n. 1;
    compared with English, v. 251, 382;
    described by Warburton, v. 92;
    homely manners, i. 460;
    learning, want of, v. 251-2, 383;
    liberality of leading men, v. 21, n. 1;
    second sight, disbelieve in, v. 227;
  coaliers, iii. 202, n. 1, 214, n. 1;
  combination among the Scotch, ii. 121, 307, n. 3; iv. 169, n. 1; v. 409:
    See below, nationality;
  'conspiracy to cheat the world,' ii. 307;
  'conspiracy in national falsehood,' ii. 297, 307;
  Constable, Lord High, v. 103;
  council-post, v. 181;
  Court of Justiciary, Palmer and Muir's case, iv. 125, n. 2;
  Court of Session, account of it, ii. 291, n. 6;
    Johnson sees the Courts, v. 40;
      attends a sitting, v. 384, 400;
      'casting pearls before swine,' ii. 201; date of rising, ii. 265;
v. 21;
    titles of the judges, ii. 291, n. 6;
    Cases—<i>Chesterfield Letters</i>, i. 266;
      Corporation of Stirling, ii. 373;
      ecclesiastical censure, iii. 59;
      Hastie the schoolmaster, ii. 144;
      Knight, a negro, iii. 86, 212;
      literary property, v. 50, 72;
      Memis, Dr., ii. 372;
      shipmaster, v. 390;
      Society of Solicitors, iv. 128;
      <i>vicious intromission</i>, ii. 196, 201, 206;
  <i>Court of Session Garland</i>:
    See BOSWELL;
  <i>Covenanted magistrates</i>, v. 382, n. 2;
  Cranston, v. 401;
  Cunninghame, v. 373;
  Cupar, v. 56;
  Danes, colony of them said to be at Leuchars, v. 70;
  Danish names in the Hebrides, v. 172;
    their retreat commemorated by Swene's Stone, v. 116, n. 3;
  <i>De Gestis Scotorum</i>, v. 406;
  debt, law of arrest for, iii. 77;
  <i>Dictionary, Johnson's</i>,
    the amanuenses and contractors chiefly Scotch, i. 287;
  <i>Dictionary of Scotch Words</i>, ii. 91;
  dinners good, v. 115;
  drinking at old Sir A. Macdonald's, v. 260;
  'droves of Scotch,' ii. 311;
  Duff House, v. 109;
  Duke, ignorance of a Scotch, v. 43, n. 4;
  Dumfermline, iii. 58; v. 399;
  Dumfries, iv. 281, n. 2;
  Dunbarton, v. 368;
  Dunbui, v. 100;
  Duncan's monument, v. 116;
  Dundee, iv. 125, n. 2; v. 71;
  Dundonald Castle, v. 373;
  <i>dungeon</i> of wit, v. 342;
  Dunnichen, v. 407;
  Dunsinane, iii. 73;
  Dutch, Scotch regiment in the pay of the, iii. 447;
  eating, modes of, v. 21, n. 3, 206;
  Edinburgh, See p. 234;
  education, English and Scotch, iii. 12, n. 2;
  Eglintoune Castle, i. 457;
  elections and electors, iv. 248, n. 1;
    controverted elections, iv. 101;
    interference of the Peers, iv. 248, 250; v. 354;
  Elgin, v. 113-15;
  Ellon, landlord at, ii. 336; v. 96;
  England found by the Scotch, iii. 78;
    Scotland a worse England, iii. 248;
  'English better animals than the Scotch,' v. 20;
  English education, iii. 12, n. 2; iv. 131;
    chiefly tamed into insignificance by it, v. 149;
  English prejudice, ii. 300, n. 5;
    virulent antipathy, v. 408;
  English pronunciation, attainment of, ii. 158-60;
  entail, law of, ii. 414;
  Episcopal Church, iii. 371-2;
    its Liturgy, ii. 163;
  episcopals are dissenters in Scotland, v. 73;
  <i>facile</i> man, a, v. 342;
  <i>factor</i>, v. 122;
  'famine, a land of,' iii. 77;
  fear in London of the Scotch at the Gordon Riots, iii. 430, n. 6;
  fencers, good, v. 66;
  feudal system, ii. 202; iii. 414;
  Findlater's, Lord, wood, v. 112;
  <i>fine</i> and <i>recovery</i> unknown there, ii. 429, n. 1;
  Fochabers, iv. 206, n. 1; v, 114;
  food enough to give them strength to run away, iii. 77;
  Fores, v. 116, 347;
  France, compared with, ii. 403;
  Frith of Forth, v. 54-5;
  gaiety, want of, iii. 387;
  gardeners, ii. 77;
  gardens, v. 84, n. 3;
  Garrick ridicules their nationality, ii. 325;
  General Assembly: See under SCOTLAND, church;
  Glasgow, coal-fire, a, v. 369;
    compared with Brentford, iv. 186;
    Foulis, the printers, v. 370;
    newspaper, extract from a, v. 344;
    Papists persecuted in 1780, iii. 427, n. 1;
    parentheses, supplies Carlisle with, iii. 402, n. 1;
    riches, its, v. 54;
    Saracen's Head, v. 369;
    St. Kilda's man visits it, i. 450;
    University—Boswell a student there, i. 465; v. 19, n. 1;
      home-students fewer than of old, v. 59;
      Johnson's observations on it, ii. 304; v. 408;
      Leechman, Principal, v. 68, n. 4;
      professors meet Johnson, v. 369-371;
        afraid of him, v. 371;
      Young, Professor, iv. 392;
      Windham a student there, iii. 119;
  Goldsmith's description of the landscape, ii, 311, n. 5;
  Gordon Castle, v. 114;
  Gordon Riots, ii. 300, n. 5; iii. 430, n. 6;
  grace at meals, v. 123;
  Grampian Hills, v. 74;
  Greek, study of, iii. 407;
  Gregory, sixteen professors of the family of, v. 48, n. 3;
  haddocks, dried, v. 110;
  Hamilton Palace, v. 385;
  Hawthornden, v. 402;
  head-dress of the ladies, v. 178, n. 3;
  heads of rebels on Temple Bar, ii. 238, n. 3;
  Hebrides: See after SCOTLAND;
  hedges, absence of, v. 69, n. 3;
  'hedges of stone,' v. 75;
  'High English,' attainment of, ii. 159;
  Highlands: See after SCOTLAND;
  <i>History of the Insurrection of 1745</i> projected, iii. 162, 414; v. 393;
  Homer, Pindar and Shakespeare of Scotland, iv. 186, n. 2;
  <i>honest man</i>, v. 264;
  horses get oats as well as the people, iv. 168, n. 3;
  hospitality, old-fashioned, iv. 222, n. 2;
  House of Commons contemptible, not sorry to see the, ii. 300, n. 5;
  humble cows, v. 380, n. 3;
  humour, not distinguished for, iv. 129;
  improvements  for immediate profit, v. 115, n. 1;
  Inch Keith, v. 55;
  inns described by Goldsmith, v. 146, n. 1;
  inoculation, v. 226;
  insurrections in 1779, iii. 408, n 4;
  invasion, need not fear, ii. 431;
  Irish, compared with the, ii. 307; iv. 169, n. 1;
  jealousy, ii. 306;
  Johnson's amanuenses Scotch, i. 187; ii. 307;
    antipathy to the Scotch, cannot account for his, iv. 169;
    attacks the Scotch historians, ii. 236;
    awes Scotch <i>literati</i>, ii. 63;
    Boswell's introduction to, i. 392;
    consults Scotch physicians, iv. 261-4;
      praises two settled in London, iv. 220, n. 2;
    damned rascal! to talk as he does of the Scotch,' iii. 170;
    desires portraits of their men of letters, iv. 265;
    friends among the Scotch, ii. 121, 306;
    good-humoured wit, ii. 77; iii. 51;
    holds a Scotchman not less acceptable than any other man, ii. 307;
    hospitality shown to, ii. 267, 303; v. 80;
      welcomed by the great, iv. 117, n. 1;
    joke at the scarcity of barley, iii. 231;
    'meant to vex them,' iv. 168;
    prejudice, shown in <i>London</i>, i. 130; v. 19;
      of the head, not of the heart, ii. 301;
      explanation of it by Reynolds, iv. 169, n. 1;
        by Boswell, v. 20;
      justification of it, ii. 121, 306; iv. 169;
    slights their advancement in literature, ii. 53;
    would not attend a Scotch service, iii. 336; v. 121, 384;
  judges, titles of, v. 77, n. 4;
  juries, no civil, ii. 201, n. 1;
  Killin, ii. 28, n. 2;
  Kilmarnock, iv. 94; v. 375;
  King <i>Bob</i>, v. 374;
  Kinghorn, v. 56;
  Kirkwall, C. J. Fox member for it, iv. 266, n. 2;
  known to each other, ii. 473;
  Knox's 'reformations,' v. 61-2;
  Kyle, v. 107, n. 1;
  <i>lady-like</i> woman, v. 157; Lanark, ii. 64; iii. 116, 359;
  land permanently unsaleable, ii. 414, n. 1;
  landlords 'a high situation,' i. 409;
  land-tax, ii. 431;
  Laurence Kirk, v. 75-6;
  <i>law</i> (Kelly <i>law</i>), v. 237;
  law arguments in writing, ii. 220;
  law life, vulgar familiarity of, iii. 179, n. 1;
  lawyers great masters of the law of nations, ii. 292;
  learning, decrease of it, v. 57, 80;
    in James VI's time, v. 57, 182;
    'like bread in a besieged town,' ii. 363;
    mediocrity of it, ii. 307, n. 3;
  leases, setting aside, v. 342;
  legitimation, law of, ii. 456;
  Leith, v. 54;
    to a Scotchman often <i>Lethe</i>, ib.;
  Leuchars, v. 70;
  Lismore, ii. 308, n. 1; v. 86;
  literature, rapid advancement in, ii. 53;
  Logie Pert, v. 75, n. 2;
  Lord High Constable, v. 103;
  Loudoun, v. 371;
  'love Scotland better than truth,' ii. 311; v. 109, n. 6;
  <i>lowns</i>, v. 218;
  Lugar, River, v. 379;
  Macbeth's heath, v. 115;
    castle, v. 129, 347-8;
  Mackinnon's Cave, v. 331;
  <i>main honest</i>, v. 303;
  Mallet the only Scot whom Scotchmen did not commend, ii. 159, n. 3;
  <i>manse</i>, v. 70;
  Mauchline, v. 375, n. 3;
  <i>mawkin</i>, v. 96;
  <i>Mercheta Mulierum</i>, v. 320;
  metaphysics, what passes for, iv. 25, n. 4;
  middle class, want of a, ii. 402, n. 1;
  Middleburgh, iii. 104;
  Militia, fear of giving Scotland a, in 1760, ii. 431, n. 1;
    bill of 1776, ii. 431; iii. 1;
    fear still remained, iii. 360, n. 3;
    established in 1793, iii. 360, n. 3;
    Scots as officers in English militia, iii. 399, n. 2;
  <i>Mirror, The</i>, iv. 390;
  mix with the English worse than the Irish, ii. 242;
  Monboddo (Lord Monboddo's residence), v. 77;
  Monimusk, iii. 103;
  Montrose, v. 72-4;
  muir-fowl, or grouse, v. 44;
  <i>Muses' Welcome to King James</i>, v. 57, 80, 81;
  nation, if we allow the Scotch to be a, iii. 387;
  nationality, extreme, ii. 242, 307, 325; iv. 186; v. 20, 409
    (See above, combination);
  Newhailes, v. 407;
  'noblest prospect,' i. 425; v. 387;
  non-jurors, iv. 287; v. 66;
  northern circuit, v. 120;
  oatmeal, v. 133, n. 2, 308, 406;
  oats defined, i. 294; iv. 168;
  Old Deer, v. 107;
  <i>old Scottish</i> sentiments, v. 40;
    enthusiasm, v. 374;
  orchard, Johnson sees an, iv. 206, n. 1;
    general want of them, v. 115;
  <i>Ossian</i>, national pride in believing in, iv. 141
    (See under MACPHERSON, James);
  outer gate locked at dinner-time, v. 60, n. 5;
  pains-taking, of all nations most, ii. 300, n. 5;
  past so unlike the present, iii. 414;
  patience in winning votes, iv. 11;
  pay of English soldiers spent in it, ii. 431;
  Peers, interference in elections, iv. 248, 250;
  Perth, an execution at, v. 104;
  Perthshire, Justices and Sheriff of, iii. 214, n. 1;
  Peterhead Well, v. 101;
  'petty national resentment,' v. 3;
  piety, compared with English, v. 123, n. 2;
  planting, era of, v. 406;
  players, do not succeed as, ii. 242;
  Poker Club, ii. 376, n. 1, 431, n. 1;
  polished at Newcastle, v. 87;
  postal service, v. 312, n. 3, 347, 369, n. 1, 385;
  post-chaises, v. 56, n. 2;
  poverty, escaped being robbed by their, iii. 410;
    supposed poverty, iv. 102;
  Presbyterian fanatics, v. 39;
  prescription of murder, v. 24, 87;
  Preston-Pans, v. 401, n. 3;
  prisoners of 1745, treatment of, v. 200;
  resentment at having the truth told, ii. 306; iii. 128;
  revenue, contributions to the, ii. 432;
  robbers, no danger from, v. 53, 177, n. 2;
  Roman Catholics, penal legislation against, iii. 427, n. 1;
  Roslin Castle, v. 402;
  sacrament, preparation for the, v. 119, n. 1;
  sailors, iii. 202, n. 1, 214, n. 1;
  sands laying the fields waste, v. 291;
  'savages,' iii. 77;
  <i>scandal</i> in Church law, ii. 172;
  scholars incorrect in <i>quantity</i>, ii. 132;
  schoolmaster, brutality of a, ii. 186, n. 1;
  schools inferior to English in classics, ii. 171;
    cannot prepare for English Universities, ii. 380;
  Scone, v. 237;
  Scotch oat-cakes and Scotch prejudices,' ii. 380;
  'Scotchmen made necessarily,' v. 48;
  <i>Scots Magazine</i>, i. 112; v. 171, 265;
  serfs, iii. 202, n. 1, 214, n. 1; v. 401, n. 3;
  Shakespeare of Scotland, the, iv. 186, n. 2;
  Sheep's head, v. 342;
  Shelburne, Lord, described by, ii. 296, n. 2;
  Sheriff-muir, v. 290;
  Sheughy Dikes, v. 70, n. 2;
  shoes, want of, v. 84, n. 3;
  short days in winter, ii. 189;
  Slains Castle, Johnson visits it, ii. 311, n. 5; v. 97-107;
    its situation, v. 99-100;
    house, v. 102;
  sloe, brought to perfection, ii. 78;
  Society of Procurators or Solicitors, iv. 128;
    Johnson's argument in their case, iv. l29-31;
  Society for Propagating Christian Knowledge, ii. 27, 279; v. 370;
  speldings, v. 55;
  spinnet, a, v. 314;
  St. Andrews, Boswell and Johnson visit it, v. 29, 57-70, 72;
    castle, v. 63;
    cathedral, v. 62-3;
    Glass's Inn, v. 57;
    grotto, v. 70;
    inscriptions, v. 63;
    'Knox's reformations,' v. 61;
    Marline's <i>Reliquiae</i>, v. 61, n. 2;
    Sharp's monument, v. 65;
    Smollett's description of the town, v. 61, n. 5;
    St. Rule's Chapel, v. 61;
    story of an old woman, v. 408;
    streets deserted, v. 65;
    tree, large, v. 69;
    University, professors, v. 65, n. 4, 66;
      grace at dinner, v. 65;
    St. Leonard's College, v. 58;
    St. Salvador's College, v. 65;
      library, v. 63;
      session, v. 96, n. 1;
    students, their number and fees, v. 65, n. 4;
      windows broken by them, v. 63, n. 2;
      mentioned, i. 359, n. 3;
  Stirling, its corporation corrupt, ii. 373;
  Stirling, county of, iii. 224;
  stone and water, Scotland consists of, v. 340;
  study of English, i. 439, n. 2;
  succession of heirs general, ii. 418;
  Swene's Stone, v. 116, n. 3;
  tenures, ancient, ii. 202; iii. 414;
  territorial titles, v. 77, n. 4;
  tokens, v. 119, n. 1;
  Tories generally, v. 272;
  torture, use of, i. 467, n. 1;
  trade leaving the east coast, v. 54;
  Tranent, v. 401, n. 3;
  trees, bareness of them, ii. 301, 304, 311; v. 69-70, 75;
    those on the eastern coast younger than Johnson, ii. 311; v. 69, n. 3;
    two large trees in one county, v. 69, 406;
    old trees at Calder, v. 120;
      at Inverary, v. 355;
    elms of Balmerino, v. 406;
    Jeffrey's comparison with England, ii. 301, n. 1;
    Johnson's sarcasms caused love of planting, ii. 301, n. 1; iii. 103;
      his stick 'a piece of timber,' v. 319;
  Treesbank, v. 372;
  truth, Scotchmen love Scotland better than, ii. 311; v. 389, n. 1;
    disposition to tell lies in favour of each other, ii. 296;
  turn-pike roads, v. 56, n. 2;
  turrets, two, mark of an old baron's residence, v. 77;
  tyrannical laws, iv. 125, n. 2;
  Union, benefits to Scotland, v. 128, 248;
    discussed in the <i>Laigh</i>, v. 40;
    few printed books before it, ii. 216;
    how it happened, ii. 91;
    money brought by it into Scotland, v. 61;
    'no longer <i>we</i> and <i>you</i>,' ii. 431;
  Universities, education given in them, ii. 363, n. 4;
    no degree conferred on Johnson, ii. 267, n. 1;
    professorships, iii. 14, n. 1
    (See under ABERDEEN, EDINBURGH, GLASGOW, and ST. ANDREWS);
  veal, v. 32;
  waiters at the inns, v. 22, 72;
  Walpole, Horace, described by, iii. 430, n. 6;
  water, too much, v. 340;
  Westport murderers, v. 227, n. 4;
  whisky, the thing that makes a Scotchman happy, v. 346;
  windows without pullies, v. 109, n. 6;
  wine, the refuse of France, v. 248;
  witchcraft, executions for, v. 46, n. i;
  write English wonderfully well, iii. 109;
  Writers to the Signet, v. 343, n. 3.</p>

<p>EDINBURGH, Academy for the deaf and dumb, v. 399;<br/>

  Advocates' Library, ii. 216; v. 13, n. 3, 40;<br/>

  Apollo Press, iii. 118;<br/>

  Arthur's Seat, iii. 116; v. 142, n. 2;<br/>

  beggars, v. 75, n. 1;<br/>

  Boyd's Inn, ii. 266; v. 21;<br/>

  Cadies or Cawdies, iv. 129;<br/>

  Canongate, ii. 30; v. 21;<br/>

  capital, a, yet small, ii. 473;<br/>

  carrier to London, ii. 272;<br/>

  Castle, v. 142, n. 2;<br/>

    would make a good prison in England, v. 387;<br/>

  Castle Hill, v. 54, 387;<br/>

  Church of England Chapel, iv. 152, n. 3; v. 27;<br/>

  College, v. 42;<br/>

  College Wynd, v. 24, n. 4;<br/>

  country round it, i. 425;<br/>

  Cow-gate, v. 42;<br/>

  'dangers of the night,' i. 119, n. i;<br/>

  described by Cockburn, v. 21, n. I;<br/>

    by R. Chambers, v. 39, n. 3, 43, n. 4;<br/>

  dinners in 1742, i. 103, n. 2;<br/>

  Enbru, v. 87;<br/>

  fortifying against the Pretender, v. 49, n. 6;<br/>

  General Assembly, Chamber of the, v. 41, n. 1;<br/>

  Grey Friars churchyard, v. 50, n. 2;<br/>

  Hanoverian faction, v. 21, n. 2;<br/>

  High School, ii. 144, n. 2; v. 80;<br/>

  High Street, v. 22;<br/>

  Holyrood House, iv. 50, n. 2, 101; v. 43;<br/>

  James's Court, v. 22;<br/>

  Johnson arrives, v. 21;<br/>

    starts on his tour, v. 51;<br/>

    returns, v. 385;<br/>

    describes the town, v. 23, n. 2;<br/>

    his lemonade, v. 22;<br/>

    his levee, v. 395;<br/>

  <i>Laigh</i>, v. 40;<br/>

    signatures of the Hanoverian Kings preserved in it, v. 41;<br/>

  _laigh-<i>shops, v. 40, n. 2;<br/>

  masquerades, ii. 205, n. i1<br/>

  New Town designed by Craig, iii. 360;<br/>

    described by Ruskin, v. 68, n. 1;<br/>

  'obscure corner, an,' ii. 381, n. 1;<br/>

  Papists persecuted in 1780, iii. 427,</i> n._ 1;<br/>

  Parliament-close, v. 42;<br/>

  Parliament House, v. 39, 79, n. 1;<br/>

  Post-housestairs, v. 42;<br/>

  Royal Infirmary, v. 42, 43;<br/>

  Select Society, v. 393;<br/>

  streets, the smells and perils of the, v. 22-3;<br/>

  St. David Street, v. 22, n. 2, 28, n. 2;<br/>

  St. Giles, v. 41;<br/>

  St. Giles's churchyard, v. 61, n. 4;<br/>

  Sunday dinner hour, v. 32;<br/>

  theatre, v. 362, n. I;<br/>

  <i>Transactions of the Royal Society</i>, iv. 25, n. 4;<br/>

  University, v. 301, n. 2:<br/>

    See above, College;<br/>

  Wesley visits it, iii. 394;<br/>

    describes the streets, v. 23, n. 1;<br/>

  White Horse Inn, v. 21, n. 2.<br/>
</p>

<p id="id00865" style="margin-left: 0%; margin-right: 0%">HEBRIDES AND THE HIGHLANDS, a M'Queen, v. 135,<i> n.</i> 3;
  Ainnit, v. 220;
  ancestors, reciting a series of, v. 237, n. 2;
  Anoch, v. 135, 185;
  Ardnamurchan, v. 380, 341;
  Argyll, Presbyterian Synod of, iii. 133;
  Armidale, Johnson visits it, v. 147-56;
    a second time, v. 275-9;
  arms forbidden, v. 151, n. 1, 212;
  Arran, v. 99;
  Auchnasheal, v. 141-2;
  bag-pipes, v. 315;
  bards, v. 324, n. 5;
  Barra, v. 236, 265, 297, n. 1;
  beer brewed in Iona, v. 338;
  Benbecula, v. 121;
  Bernera, v. 145, 319;
  boats without benches, v. 179, n. 2;
  bones in the windows of churches, v. 169;
  books in the houses, v. 136, 149, 158, 166, 181, 261, 265,
285, 287, 294, 302, 314, 323;
  Borneo, as unknown as, v. 392, n. 6;
  Bracadale, v. 224;
  Breacacha, v. 291;
  breakfast, cheese served up at, v. 167;
  bridles, want of, v. 345;
  Broadfoot, v. 156;
  brogues, v. 162, n. 1;
  Brolos, iii. 126;
  <i>Buy</i>, v. 341;
  Caithness, iv. 136;
  Cameron, v. 365;
  Campbell-town, v. 284;
  Camuscross, v. 267;
  chapels in ruins, v. 170, n, 1;
  charms for milking the cows, v. 164;
  chiefs, how addressed, v. 156, n. 3;
    arbitrary sovereign needful to restrain them, v. 206;
    attachment to them, v. 337-8;
    authority destroyed, v. 177;
    change of system, v. 231;
    degenerating into rapacious landlords, i. 409, n. 2; v. 27, n. 3, 378;
    displaced by landlords, iii. 127, 262, n. 2;
    house should be like a Court, v. 275;
    people, how they should treat their, v. 143, 250;
  chieftainship, 'an ideal point of honour,' v. 410;
    not to be sold, i. 254;
  children compared with London children, ii. 101;
  churches, v. 289, n. 1;
  civility, v. 131, n. 3;
  Clanranald, v. 121;
  Clans, their order, ii. 269, 270;
  claymores, v. 212, 229;
  climate, v. 173, 377;
  <i>cloth</i>, in the sense of <i>sail</i>, v. 283;
  coin, scarcity of, v. 254;
  Col, Isle of, Johnson visits it, v. 284-308;
    castle, v. 292; church in ruins, v. 289;
    Col's house, v. 291;
    charter-room in it, v. 327;
    complaints of trespasses, v. 301;
    curious custom of the lairds, v. 329;
    large stone, v. 290, 302;
    lead mine, v. 302;
    more boys born than girls, v. 209, n. 3;
    people and productions, v. 300-1;
    sandhills, v. 291; storm, v. 304;
    student of Aberdeen University, v. 301;
    superstitions, v. 306;
    mentioned, ii. 275; iii. 246;
  College of the Templars, v. 224;
  Colvay, v. 309, n. l;
  common land in Rasay, v. 171;
  computation of distances, v. 183;
  cordiality increased by Boswell's drinking, iii. 330;
  <i>Corpach</i>, v. 227, n. 4;
  Corrichatachin, Johnson visits it, v. 156-162;
    a second time, v. 257-65;
    mentioned, iv. 155;
  costume of the gentlemen, v. 162, 184;
  cottages in Sky, v. 256;
    in Col, v. 293;
  'country of saddles and bridles,' not a, v. 375;
  Cuchillin's well, v. 254;
  Cuillin, v. 236; Cullen, v. 110;
  custom-houses, no, in the islands, v. 165, n. 2;
  dancing, v. 166, 178, 277;
  dangers of the tour, v. 13, 282, 283, n. 1;
  deer, freedom to shoot, v. 140;
  desolation and penury of the islands, v. 377, n. 3;
  discomforts suffered by travellers, v. 377, n. 2;
  disgust properly felt at the Hebrides, v. 317;
  distinctness in narration, general want of, v. 294;
  drinking in Sky, v. 258, 262;
  Dun Can, v. 168, 170;
  Duntulm, v. 148;
  Dunvegan, description of the castle, v. 207, 223, 233;
    Johnson visits it, v. 207-234;
    stays with pleasure, v. 208, 221, 224;
    mentioned, ii. 275; iii. 271; v. 150; 176, n. 2;
  Durinish, v. 234;
  education, want of it in Iona, v. 338, n. 1;
  Egg, Isle of, ii. 309;
  English spoken well, v. 136, n. 1;
  emigration of Highlanders due to rapacious landlords, v. 27, n. 3,
136-7, 148, n. 1, 150, n. 3, 161, 205;
    dance called <i>America</i>, v. 277;
    early emigrants, v. 299;
    emigrant ships, v. 180, 212, 236, 277-8;
    leaves a lasting vacuity, v. 294, n. 1;
    people getting hardened to it, v. 278;
  episcopacy, inclined to, v. 162, n. 4;
  Erse, Irish, similarity to, ii. 156, 347;
    Nairne, first heard at, v. 117, n. 3;
    scriptures in it, ii. 27-30, 156, 279, 479; v. 370;
      other books, ii. 279, 285;
    Shaw's <i>Erse Grammar</i>, iii. 106-7;
    <i>Gaelick Dictionary</i>, iv. 252;
    songs, v. 117, 162, 178;
      never explained to Johnson v. 24l;
      one interpreter found, v, 318, n. 1;
    written language, not a, iii. 107;
    written very lately, ii. 297, 309, 347, 383;
  estates, size of, v. 165, n. 2, 176, n. 2, 412, n. 2;
  fabulous tradition, v. 171;
  Fladda, v. 172, 412, n. 2;
  <i>forest</i>, v. 237;
  Fort Augustus, Johnson visits it, v. 134-5;
    has a good night there, iii. 99, n. 4, 369;
    military road, ii. 305;
    officers who had served in America, iii. 246; v. 135;
    mentioned, v. 140, 142, 188;
  Fort George, v. 123-7;
  fowls, method of catching, v. 179;
  foxes, price set on their heads, v. 173, n. 2;
  funerals, v. 235;
    spirits consumed at them, v. 332;
  gardens very rare in Sky, v. 237, 261;
  <i>gaul</i>, a plant, v. 174;
  General's Hut, v. 134;
  Glencroe, v. 183, n. 2, 341;
  Glenelg, v. 141, 145-7;
  Glenmorison, v. 135;
  Glensheal, v. 140;
  graddaned meal, v. 167;
  greyhounds, v. 330, n, 1;
  Gribon, v. 331;
  Grishinish, v. 205;
  Grissipol, v. 289;
  Harris, v. 176, n. 2, 227, n. 4, 338, n. 1, 410;
  <i>Halyin foam'eri</i>, v. 162, 290;
  food, v. 133;
  George III, faithful to, v. 202;
  grain carried home on horses, v. 235;
  hereditary occupations, v. 120;
  heritable jurisdictions, v. 46, n. 1, 177, 343;
  <i>Highland Laddie</i>, v. 184, n. 1;
  houses of the gentry, small and crowded, v. 160, 262, 291, 321;
    mire in a bedroom, ib.;
  huts, v. 132, 136;
  Icolmkill: See Iona; idleness, v. 218;
  inaccuracy of their reports, v. 150, n. 2, 237, 324, n. 5, 336;
  Inchkenneth, Johnson visits it, v. 322-331;
    Scott's description of it, v. 322, n. 1;
    Johnson's <i>Ode</i>, ii. 293; v. 325;
    Boswell in the ruined chapel, v. 327;
    mentioned, v. 310;
  Indians, not so terrifying as, v. 142;
    black and wild as savages, v. 143;
    like wild Indians, v. 257;
  infidelity in a gentleman, v. 168;
  inns, v. 134, n. 1, 138, 145-6, 181, 309, 346-7;
    want of one in Iona, v. 335;
  interrogated, not used to be, ii. 310, n. 1;
  Inverary, castle, built by Duke Archibald, v. 345;
    the total defiance of expense, v. 355;
    Johnson visits it, v. 346-362; and Wilkes, iii. 73;
    mentioned, v. 312;
  Inverness, v. 128-131;
    Boswell preached at, v. 128;
      writes to Garrick, v. 347;
    Johnson buys <i>Cocker</i>, v. 138;
  Inverness-shire, v. 150, n. 3;
  Iona, Boswell and Johnson visit it, v. 334-338;
    Johnson wades to the shore, v. 368;
    his famous description, iii. I73, 455; v. 334;
    Duke of Argyle present owner, v. 335;
    building stones from Nuns' Island, v. 333;
    monuments, v. 336;
    account of the inhabitants, v. 338;
    mentioned, ii. 277; v. 317;
  Irish understood by Highlanders, ii. 156; Isa, v. 249, 286;
  island, life in an, v. 290, 295;
  Johnson shows the spirit of a Highlander, v. 324;
  <i>Johnson</i> and <i>Johnston</i>, v. 341;
  joyous social manners, v. 157;
  Kingsburgh, Johnson visits it, v. 179, 183-7;
    sleeps in a celebrated bed, v. 185, 187, 189;
  Knoidart, v. 149, 190, 199;
    landlords diminish their people, v. 300;
    infatuated, v. 294;
    restraint to be placed on raising the rents, v. 27, n. 3
    (See above under chiefs, and below under rents and tenants);
  law, want of, ii. 126;
  Leven, River, v. 365, n. 2, 367;
  Lewis, v. 410;
  Little Colonsay, iii. 133;
  little wants of life ill supplied, ii. 303;
  Loch-Awe, v. 345, n. 1;
  Loch-Braccadil, v. 236, 253;
  Lochbradale, v. 212;
  Lochbroom, v. 194;
  Lochiern, v. 283;
  Lochlevin, ii. 283;
  Loch Lomond, its climate, iii. 382;
    Johnson visits it, iv. 179; v. 363-4;
  Loch Ness, v. 132, 297, n. 1;
  Long Island, v. 187;
  longevity, no extraordinary, v. 358, n. 1;
  Lorn, v. 120;
  Lowlanders scorned, v. 136, n. 1;
  M'Craas, the, or Macraes, v. 142-3, 225;
  M'Cruslick, v. 166, n. 2;
  Macfarlane, Laird of, <i>the</i> Macfarlane, v. 156, n. 3;
  Macgregors forced to change their name, v. 127, n. 3;
  mapping of the country, ii. 356;
  march to Derby, iii. 162;
  mile stones removed, v. 183, n. 2;
  ministers, v. 224, n. 2;
  Moidart, v. 149;
  money, admission of, iii. 127;
  Morven, v. 280; Moy, v. 341;
  Muck, Isle of, v. 225, 249;
  Mugstot, v. 148, 188, 259;
  Mull, compared with Fleet Street, iii. 302;
    Johnson sails for it, v. 279;
    carried away to Col, v. 281;
    arrives, v. 308;
    no post, v. 312, n. 3;
    ride through it, v. 318;
    'a most dolorous country,' ib., 341;
    a great cave, v. 331-2;
    <i>woods</i>, v. 332;
    moonlight sail along the coast, v. 333;
    ferry to Oban, v. 343;
  Nairne, v. 117;
  newspaper, sight of a, v. 323;
  noble animal, v. 400;
  nomenclature in the Highlands, v. 156, n. 3;
  Nuns' Island, v. 333;
  Oban, v. 344;
  Officers of Justice, want of, v. 177;
  Orkneys, ii. 119, n. 1;
  Ostig, Johnson visits it, v. 265-75;
  parishes, v. 289, n. 1;
  peat fires first seen at Nairne, v. 117, n. 3;
    cutting peat, v. 306;
  periphrastic language, v. 198;
  Portawherry, v. 338;
  Portree, v. 180-1, 189, 190, 254, 278;
  prayer before milking a cow, v. 123;
  prisons in the lairds' houses, v. 292, 343;
  <i>quern</i>, v. 256;
  'raise their clans in London,' iii. 399, n. 3;
  Rasay, Isle of, approach, v. 164;
    explored by Boswell, v. 168-74;
    men out in the '45, v. 171;
    old castle and new mansion, v. 172;
    cave, ib.;
    people never ride, v. 173;
    animal life, ib.;
    burnt in '45, v. 174, n. 1;
    no officers of justice, v. 177;
    dancing, v. 178;
    Johnson's praise of the Isle, iii. 128; v. 178, n. 1, 413;
    the Pretender hides there, v. 190-4;
    mentioned, ii. 275; v. 150;
  Rattakin, v. 144;
  reapers singing, v. 165;
  reels, iii. 198;
  regiments raised by Pitt, iii. 198; v. 149-50;
  rentals, v. 165, n. 2, 176, n. 2;
  rents paid in bills, v. 254;
    in kind, ib., n. 2;
  racked, v. 137, 148, n. 1, 149, 150, n. 3, 205, 221, n. 3, 250;
  riding in Sky, v. 205;
  roads, want of, v. 173;
    soldiers at work on them, v. 136;
    beginning of one, v. 235, n. 2;
    sight of one, v. 322;
  Rona, Isle of, v. 165, 172, 412, n. 2;
  Rorie More's Cascade, v. 207, 215;
  Rosedow, v. 363;
  Ross-shire, v. 150, n. 3;
  sailors, very unskilful, v. 283, n. 1;
  <i>scalch</i> or <i>skalk</i>, v. 166;
  Scalpa, v. 162;
  Sconser, v. 179, 257;
  second-sight, believed by all the islanders but the clergy,
v. 227, n. 3;
    Boswell's belief, ii. 318; v. 358, 390-1;
    Dempster's criticism, v. 407;
    Johnson's curiosity never advanced to conviction, ii. 10, n. 3;
    'willing to believe,' ii. 318;
    hears instances, v. 159-60, 320;
    loose interpretations, v. 163-4;
    arguments for and against, v. 407, nn. 3 and 4;
  <i>Senachi</i>, v. 324;
  sense, native good, v. 147;
  servants in Sky faithless, v. 167;
  sheets, want of, in the Highlands, v. 216;
  shelties, v. 284;
  <i>shielings</i>, v. 141;
  shops, want of, v. 27, n. 4;
  Slate, v. 147, 151, 156, 255;
  sleds, v. 235;
  Sky, church bells, no, v. 151;
    Johnson arrives, v. 147;
    leaves for Rasay, v. 162;
    returns, v. 180;
    leaves finally, v. 279;
    his <i>Ode</i>, v. l55;
    Macdonald, Lady Margaret, beloved there, iii. 383;
    one justice of the peace, v. 177;
    price upon the heads of foxes, v. 173, n. 2;
    Snizort, v. 166;
    South Uist, v. 236;
    spades used in Sky, v. 235, 261;
    Spanish invasion in 1719, v. 140, n. 3;
    strangers will never settle in the isles, v. 294, n. 1;
    Strath, v. 156, 195;
  St. Kilda,
    Boswell proposes to buy it, ii. 149;
    cold-catching, ii. 51; v. 278;
    explanation suggested, ii. 52;
    fire-penny tax, iii. 243, n. 2;
    Glasgow, St. Kilda's man at, i. 450;
    Horace and Virgil studied there, v. 338;
    Lady Grange a prisoner, v. 227;
    Macaulay's <i>History of St. Kilda</i>, ii. 51; v. 118-9;
    Martin's <i>Voyage to St. Kilda</i>, ii. 51, n. 3, 52, n. 1;
    poetry, v. 228;
  Staffa, Johnson sees it at a distance, v. 332;
    sold, iii. 126, 133;
  Strathaven, iii. 360;
  Strichen, v. 107;
  Strolimus, v. 257;
  superstitions, v. 306, n. 1;
  tacksmen, v. 156, n. 3, 205, n. 3;
  tailors, v. 226;
  <i>taiscks</i>, v. 160;
  Talisker, Johnson visits it, v. 250-56, 266, n. 2, 306, 383;
  Tarbat, v. 363;
  targets, v. 212;
  tartan dress prohibited, v. 162, n. 2;
  Teigh Franchich, v. 293;
  tenants, combination among them, v. 150, n. 3;
    dependent on their landlords, v. 177, n. 1;
    fine on marriage, v. 320-1;
  Thurot's descent on some of the isles, iv. 101, n. 4;
  Tobermorie, v. 308-10, 332;
  tradition, not to be argued out of a, v. 303;
  translate their names in the Lowlands, v. 341, n. 4;
  trusted, little to be, ii. 310;
  turnips introduced, v. 293;
  Tyr-yi, v. 209, n. 3, 287, 3l2;
  Ulinish, v. 224;
    Johnson visits it, v. 235-48;
    sees a subterraneous house, v. 236;
    and cave, v. 237;
    gleanings of his conversation there, v. 249, 389;
  Ulva's Isle sold, iii. 133;
    Johnson visits it, v. 319-22;
  violence, Johnson and Boswell fear, v. 139-40;
  waves, size of the, v. 251, n. 2;
  <i>wawking</i> cloth, v. 178;
  wheat bread never tasted by the M'Craas, v. 142;
  wheel-carriages, no, v. 235, n. 2;
  whisky served in a shell, v. 290;
  whistling, a gentleman shows his independence by, v. 358;
  'Who <i>can</i> like the Highlands?' v. 377;
  <i>wood</i>, bushes called, v. 250;
    heath, v. 332;
  wretchedness of the people in 1810 and 1814, v. 338, n. 1;
  Zetland, v. 338, n. 1.
<i>Scots Magazine</i>. See under SCOTLAND.
SCOTSMAN, a violent, iii. 170.
SCOTT, Archibald, i. 117, n. 1.
SCOTT, Mr. Benjamin, iii. 459.
SCOTT, George Lewis, iii. 117.
SCOTT, John, afterwards first Earl of Eldon,
  Boswell, never mentioned by, iii. 261, n. 2;
    trick played on, ib.;
    and taste, ii. 191, n. 2;
  church-going, iv. 414, n. 1;
  deathwarrants, iii. 121, n. 1;
  Dunning's way of getting through business, iii. 128, n. 5;
  George III, on the making of baronets, ii. 354, n. 2;
  Heberden's, Dr., kindness to him, iv. 228, n. 2;
  Johnson's visit to Oxford in 1773, ii. 268, n. 2;
  Lee, 'Jack,' on the duties of an advocate, ii. 48, n. 1;
    on the India Bill, iii. 224, n. 1;
  Norton, Sir Fletcher, character of, ii. 472, n. 2;
  Oxford tutor, unwilling to be an, iv. 92, n. 2;
  Pitt on the honesty of mankind, iii. 236, n. 3;
  port, liking for, iv. 91, n. 2;
  Porteus, Bishop, on knotting, iii. 242, n. 3;
  portrait in University College, ii. 25, n. 2;
  retirement, after his, ii. 337, n. 4;
  Royal Marriage Bill, ii. 152, n. 2;
  sermons written by Lord Stowell, v. 67, n. 1;
  small certainties, ii. 323, n. 1;
  Taylor, Chevalier, anecdote of the, iii. 389, n. 4;
  Warton's, Rev. T., lectures, i. 279, n. 2;
  Wilkes at the Levee, iii. 430, n. 4.
SCOTT, Mrs. John (Lady Eldon), ii. 268, n. 2.
SCOTT, John, of Amwell,
  <i>Elegies</i>, ii. 351;
  meets Johnson, ii. 338;
  dread of small-pox, ib., n. 1.
SCOTT, Sir Walter,
  Abel Sampson, a <i>probationer</i>, ii. 171, n. 3;
  <i>accommodate</i>, v. 310, n. 3;
  Auchinleck, Lord, anecdote of, v. 382, n. 2;
  birth, v. 24, n. 4;
  Blair, mistaken about, v. 361, n. 1;
  Boswell and the Douglas Cause, v. 353, n. 1;
    spoils one of his anecdotes, v. 396, n. 4;
  Burns, sees, v. 42, n. 1;
  Cameron's execution, i. 146, n. 2;
  charms in the Hebrides, v. 164, n. 1;
  clans, order of the, ii. 270, n. 1;
  coursing, v. 330, n. 1;
  Culloden, cruelties after, v. 196, n. 3;
  <i>Detector's</i>  letter to him, i. 230, n. 1;
  <i>Dirleton's Doubts</i>,  iii. 205, n. 1;
  Dunvegan Castle, v. 2O7, n, 2, 208, n. 1, 233, n. 1;
  Errol, Earls of, v. 101, n. 4, 106, n. 1;
  Erskine, Dr., v. 391, n. 3;
  Finnon haddocks, v. 110, n. 2;
  Forbes's generosity to him, v. 253, n. 3;
  Forbes, Sir W., lines on, v. 25, n. 1;
  Grange, Lady, v. 227, n. 4;
  halls of old Scotch houses, v. 60, n. 5;
  <i>Hardyknute</i>, ii. 91, n. 2;
  Highlands, discomforts in the, v. 377, n. 2;
  Highlanders forbidden to carry arms, v. 151, n. 1;
  Home's tragedies, ii. 320, n. 1;
  hospitality, old-fashioned, iv. 222, n. 2;
  humble-cow, v. 380, n. 3;
  Inch Keith, v. 55, n. 3;
  Inchkenneth, v. 322, n. 1;
  Iona, v. 338, n. 1;
  Johnson and Auchinleck, Lord, i. 96, n. 1; v. 382, n. 2;
    and Boswell's voyage highly perilous, v. 283, n. 1, 313, n. 1;
    definition of oats, i. 294, n. 8;
    on dinners, v. 342, n. 2;
    at Dunvegan, v. 208, n. 1;
    and <i>Johnston</i>, v. 341, n. 4;
    <i>Ode to Mrs. Thrale</i>, v. 157, n. 3;
    and Pot, iv. 5, n. 1;
    the 'Sassenach More,' ii. 267, n. 2;
    and the Scotch love of planting trees, ii. 301, n. 1;
    and Adam Smith, inaccuracy about, v. 369, n. 5;
  Kames, Lord, ii. 200, n. 1;
  Lovat's monument, v. 235, n. 1;
  Mackenzie, Sir George, v. 212, n. 3;
  Mackenzie, Henry, i. 360, n. 2;
  Maclaurin's mottoes, iii. 212, n. 1;
  <i>Marmion</i> quoted, iv. 217, n. 2;
  Mickle's <i>Cumnor Hall</i>, v. 349, n. 1;
  Monboddo, Lord, ii. 74, n. 1; v. 77, n. 3, 78, n. 2;
  Nairne, William, v. 53, n. 3;
  <i>Ossian</i>, v. 164, n. 2;
  Pitcairne's poetry, v. 58, n. 1;
  Pleydell, Mr. Counsellor, ii. 376, n. 1; v. 22, n. 2;
  <i>Redgauntlet</i>, introduction, i. 146, n. 2;
  Reynolds and Sunday painting, iv. 414, n. 1;
  Roslin Chapel, v. 402, n. 4;
  scarcity of coin in the Hebrides, v. 254, n. 1;
  Scotticism, a, v. 15, n. 4;
  second sight, v. 159, n. 3;
  sheep's-head, v. 342, n. 2;
  Southey, letter from, v. 40, n. 3;
  Tobermory, v. 309, n. 1;
  <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>, i. 193, n. 3; iv. 45, n. 3;
  Walpole's <i>History of his own Time</i>, v. 212, n. 3;
  <i>waulking the cloth</i>, v. 178, n. 2;
  Woodhouselee, Lord, v. 387, n. 4;
  writers to the Signet and Sir A. Maclean, v. 343, n. 3;
  Young's parody of Johnson's style, iv. 392, n. 1.
SCOTT, Dr., afterwards Sir William Scott, and Lord Stowell;
  Blackstone's bottle of port, iv. 91;
  Boswell, describes, v. 52, n. 6;
  Coulson, Rev. Mr., ii. 381, n. 2; v. 459, n. 4;
  Crosbie, Andrew, ii. 376, n. 1;
  dinner at his chambers, iii. 261;
  exercise of eating and drinking, iv. 91, n. 2;
  Johnson,
    accompanies, to Edinburgh, i. 462; v. 16, 20-22, 24, 27, 32;
      to the scene of the Gordon Riots, iii. 429;
    bequest to him, iv. 402, n. 2;
    on conversions, ii. 105;
    epitaph, iv. 444-5;
    executor, iv. 402, n. 2;
    friendship with, ii. 25, n. 2; v. 21;
    gown, i. 347, n. 2;
    horror at the sight of the bones of a whale, v. 169, n. 1;
    on innovation, iv. 188;
    as a member of parliament, ii. 137, n. 3, 139;
    mezzotinto, possesses, iv. 421, n. 2;
      presents it to University College, iii. 245, n. 3;
    might have been Lord Chancellor, iii. 309;
  lectures at Oxford, gave, iv. 92;
  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;
  'Ranelagh girl,' describes a, iii. 199, n. 1;
  sermons, a writer of, v. 67, n. 1;
  University College, fellow of, ii. 440;
  mentioned, iv. 344; v. 51.
SCOTT, Mr., 'You, and I, and Hercules,' iv. 45, n. 3.
SCOTTICISMS,
  Guthrie's, i. 118, n. 1;
  Hume's short collection, ii. 72:
  See under BOSWELL, Scotch accents.
<i>Scottifying</i>, v. 55.
SCOUNDREL,
  applied to a clergyman's wife, ii. 456, n. 3;
  Johnson's use of the term, iii. 1.
<i>Scoundrelism</i>, v. 106.
SCRASE, Mr., v. 455, n. 3.
SCREEN, Johnson dines behind one, i. 163, n. 1.
SCRIPTURE PHRASES, ii. 213.
SCRIPTURES,
  in Erse: See under SCOTLAND, Hebrides, Erse;
  evidence for their truth: See under CHRISTIANITY.
SCRIVENERS, iii. 21, n. 1.
SCROFULA, i. 41.
SCRUB in the <i>Beaux Stratagem</i>, iii. 70.
SCRUPLES,
  Baxter's, ii. 477;
  Johnson afraid of them, ii. 421;
    distracted by them, ii. 476;
    no friend to them, v. 62;
    warns against them, ii. 423;
  people load life with them, ii. 72, n. 1.
<i>Scrupulosity</i>, iv. 5.
SCYTHIANS, v. 224.
SEA, feeling its motion after landing, v. 285.
SEA-LIFE. See SAILORS and SHIPS.
SEAFORD, first Lord, iv. 176, n. 1; v. 142.
SEAFORTH, Lord, v. 227, n. 4.
SEASONS,
  forgotten in London, iv. 147;
  their influence: See under WEATHER.
SECKER, Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury,
  'decent,' i. 508; ii. 283, n. 2; iv. 29, n. 1;
  described by H. Walpole, iv. 29, n. 1;
  Johnson requested to seek his patronage, i. 368;
  <i>Life</i>, iv. 29;
  <i>Reports of Debates</i>, i. 507;
  sermon quoted, i. 33;
  toast of church and king, iv. 29.
SECOND SIGHT, in Wales, ii. 150.
  See under SCOTLAND, HEBRIDES, second sight.
SECTARY, a religious, ii. 472.
SEDUCTION, imaginary case of, iii. 18.
SEED, Rev. Jeremiah, iii. 248.
<i>Seeking after</i>, iii. 314.
SEGUED, Emperor of Abyssinia, i. 87, 340, n. 3.
SELDEN, John,
  knowledge varied, ii. 158;
  Table-talk, v. 311, 414;
  mentioned, iv. 23, n. 3; v. 225, n. 3.
SELECTIONS FROM AUTHORS, Johnson disapproves of them, iii. 29.
SELF-IMPORTANCE, iii. 171.
SELWIN, Mr., iii. 166, n. 3.
SELWYN, George, Beauclerk at Venice, i. 381, n. 1.
<i>Semel insanivimus omnes</i>, iv. 182.
SENATE OF LILLIPUT. See under DEBATES.
SENECA, iii. 296, n. 1; v. 296.
<i>Senectus</i>, iii. 344.
SENEGAL, v. 98, n. 1.
<i>Senilia</i>, iv. 2.
SENSATIONS, 'la théorie des sensations agréables,' i. 344.
<i>Sentimental Journey</i>. See STERNE.
SENTIMENTALISTS, iii. 149, n. 2.
SERFS IN SCOTLAND. See SCOTLAND, serfs.
<i>Serious Call</i>. See LAW, William.
SERJEANTSON, Rev. James, iv. 393, n. 3.
SERMONS,
  attended to better than prayers, ii. 173;
  considerable branch of literature, iv. 105;
  Johnson's advice about their composition, iii. 437; v. 68;
  his opinion of the best, iii. 247
    (See under JOHNSON, sermons);
  passions, addressed to the, iii. 248;
  style, improvement in, iii. 248.
SERVANTS, male and female, ii. 217.
SERVITORS. See OXFORD.
SESSIONAL REPORTS. See OLD BAILEY.
SETTLE, Elkanah,
  City-Poet, iii. 76;
  Dryden's rival, ib.;
  mentioned, i. 55.
SETTLEMENT OF ESTATES, ii. 432.
<i>Seven Champions of Christendom</i>, iv. 8, n. 3.
SEVEN PROVINCES, i. 475.
SEVERITY, government by, ii. 186.
SÉVIGNÉ, Mme. de,
  existence, the task of, iii. 53;
  misprints of her name, iii. 53, n. 2;
  Pelisson, her friend, i. 90, n. 1;
  style copied by Gray and Walpole, iii. 31, n. 1;
  truthfulness on a death-bed, v. 397, n. 1.
SEWARD, Miss Anna,
  <i>Acis and Galatea</i>,  quotation from, iii. 242, n. 2;
  Boswell introduced to her, ii. 467;
    calls on her, iii. 412;
    controversy with her, i. 92, n. 2; ii. 467, n. 4; iv. 331, n. 2;
  dines at Mr. Dilly's, iii. 284-300;
  fanciful reflection, i. 40, n. 3;
  ghosts, iii. 297;
  Hayley, correspondence with, iv. 331, n. 2;
  Johnson and the learned pig, iv. 373;
    praises her poetry, iv. 331;
  <i>Ode on the death of Captain Cook</i>, iv. 331;
  mentioned, iv. 307, 372, n. 4.
SEWARD, Rev. Mr., of Lichfield,
  account of him, ii. 467;  iii. 151;
  valetudinarian, iii. 152, 412;
  mentioned, i. 81, n. 2; ii. 471.
SEWARD, William, F.R.S.,
  account of him, iii. 123;
  Batheaston Vase, perhaps wrote for the, ii. 337, n. 2;
  Harington's <i>Nugae Antiquae</i>, suggests a motto for, iv. 180;
  Johnson and Bacon, iii. 194;
    bow to an Archbishop, iv. 198;
    epitaph, iv. 423, n, 3, 445;
    on the Ministry and Opposition, iv. 139;
    recommends him to Boswell, iii. 124;
    tetrastrick on Goldsmith, translates, ii. 282, n. 1;
  Langton's ancestor and Sir M. Hale, iv. 310, n. 2;
  Parr, Dr., letter from, iv. 423, n. 3;
  people without religion, iv. 215;
  retired tradesman, anecdote of a, iii. 176, n. 1;
  Scotland, visits, iii. 123-4, 126;
  mentioned, i. 367; ii. 76, 308; iii. 167, 354; iv. 43, 83, n. 1, 444.
SEXES,
  equality in another world, iii. 287;
  intercourse between the two, ii. 473; iii. 341;
  irregular, should be punished, iii. 17.
SHAFTESBURY, fourth Earl of, i. 464.
SHAKESPEARE, William,
  Boar's Head Club, v. 247;
  'Boswell,' needed a, v. 415;
  'brought into notice,' ii. 92;
  Capel's edition, iv. 5;
  Catharine of Aragon, character of, iv. 242;
  Congreve, compared with, ii. 85-7,
  Corneille and the Greek dramatists, compared with, iv. 16
  diction of common life, iii. 194
  Dogberry boasting of his losses, i. 65, n. 1;
  editions published between 1725-1751, v. 244, n. 2;
  fame, his, iii. 263;
  fault, never six lines without a, ii. 96;
  Hamlet's description of his father, iv. 72, n. 3;
    the ghost, iv. 16, n. 2;  v. 38,
      (see below under Johnson's edition);
  Hanmer's edition, i. 178, n. 1;
  imitations, ii. 225, n. 2;
  Johnson's admiration of him, ii. 86, n. 1;
  Johnson's edition, account of it, <i>Proposals</i>, i. 175, n. 3, 318, 327;
    delayed, i. 176, 319, 322, 327, 329, 496, n. 3; ii. 1, n. 1;
    subscribers, i. 319, n. 3, 323, 327, 336, 499;
    list lost and money spent, iv. 111;
    published, i. 496;
    went through several editions, ii. 204;
    re-published by Steevens, ii. 114, 204;
    attacked by Churchill, i. 319-320;
    confesses his ignorance where ignorant, i. 327;
    edited it from necessity, iii. 19, n. 3;
    Garrick not mentioned, ii. 92;
    reflection on him, ii. 192;
  Kenrick's attack, i. 497;
    newspaper criticisms, ii.
    notes on two passages in <i>Hamlet</i>, iii. 55;
    preface, i. 496, 497, n. 3;
    Warburton criticised, i. 329;
    Warton, J. and T., notes by, i. 335; ii. 114-5;
    Johnson's <i>Prologue</i>, iv. 25;
    Jubilee, ii. 68;
  Ladies' Shakespeare Club, v. 244, n. 2;
  Latin, knowledge of, iv. 18;
  <i>Macbeth</i>, description of night, ii. 90;
    never read through by Mrs. Pritchard, ii. 349;
    speech to the witches, v. 76, 115;
    castle, v. 129, 348;
    worse for being acted, ii. 92;
  Malone's edition, i. 8; iv. 142, 181, n. 3;
  mulberry tree, i. 83, n. 4;
  Mulberry Tree, a poem i. 101;
  name omitted in an <i>Essay on the English Poets</i>, i. 140;
  night, descriptions of, ii. 87, 90;
  <i>Othello</i>, dialogue between Iago and Cassio, iii. 41;
    moral, iii. 39;
  plays worse for being acted, ii. 92;
  representations of his plays, v. 244, n. 2;
  Reynolds's note on Macbeth's castle, v. 129;
  <i>Romeo and Juliet</i> neglected, v. 244, n. 2;
    altered by Otway and Garrick, ib.
  Shakspeare, <i>Mr.</i> William, iv. 325, n. 3;
  <i>Shakespearian ribbands</i>, ii. 69;
  spelling of his name, v. 124;
  style ungrammatical, iv. 18, n. 2;
  terrifies the lonely reader, i. 70;
  Timon's scolding, iv. 26;
  tragedies inferior to Home's <i>Douglas</i>, ii. 320, n. 1;
  Warburton's edition, i. 175, 176, n. 1, 329;
  witches, iii. 382;
  quotations
    <i>As you Like it</i>, iii. 2. 210-iii. 255, n. 4
    <i>Coriolanus</i>, iii. 1 325-iii. 256, n. 1; iv. 4, 5-i. 263, n. 3;
    <i>Cymbeline</i>, iii. 3. 38-iii. 450; iv. 2. 261-iv. 235, n. 1;
    <i>Hamlet</i>, i. 2. 133-v. 155, n. 1; i. 2 185-iv. 335, n. 3; i. 3.
41-iii. 178, n. 3; iii. 1. 56-v. 279, n. 2; iii. 1. 78-ii. 298, n. 3;
iii. 2. 40-ii. 159, n. 5; iii. 2. 68-ii. 384; iii. 2 371-ii. 291, n. 2;
iii. 4. 60-v. 19, n. 3; iii. 4. 63-i. 118;
    <i>1 Henry IV</i>, v. 4. 161-i. 250;
    <i>2 Henry IV</i>, i. 2. 9-iv. 178, n. 5; iii. 1. 9-v. 140, n. 2;
iii. 2. 67-v. 310, n. 3; iv. 1 179-iv. 406, n. 1;
    <i>1 Henry VI</i>, i. 2. 12-v. 284, n. 1;
    <i>2 Henry VI</i>, iii. 3. 29-v. 113, n. 1; iv. 2. 141-iii. 51, n. 1;
    <i>Henry VIII</i>, iii. 2. 358-i. 315, n. 3; iv. 2. 51—67-iv. 71,
n. 3; iv. 2. 76-i. 24;
    <i>Julius Caesar</i>, i. 2. 92-i. 180, n. 1
    <i>King Lear</i>, ii. 2. 17-iv. 26, n. 2; ii. 2. 160-ii. 446, n. 3;
ii. 4. 18-iii. 381, n. 1; iii. 4. 140-v. 145, n. 1;
    <i>Love's Labour Lost</i>, ii. 1. 66-iv. 97, n. 1;
    <i>Macbeth</i>, i. 3. 72-v. 119, n. 4; ii. 2. 12-ii. 322;
ii. 3. 91-i. 299; ii. 4. 12-i. 263, n. 3; iii. 4. 17-ii. 472, 1;
v. 3. 40-iv. 400, n. 2; v. 5. 23-ii. 92, n. 2; v. 8. 30-v. 347, n. 5;
    <i>Measure for Measure</i>, iii. 1. 115-iv. 399, n. 6;
iv. 3. e-iii. 196, n. 1;
    <i>Much Ado about Nothing</i>, iii. 5. 35-iii. 287, n. 2;
    <i>Othello</i>, ii. 1. 59-ii. 408; iii. 3. 165-v. 30, n. 3;
iii. 3. 346-iii. 347, n. 3;
   v. 2. 345-v. 416, n. 1;
    <i>Rape of Lucrece</i>, l. IIII, iv. 181, n. 3;
    <i>Richard II</i>, i. 3. 309-i. 129, n. 3; ii. 300; iv. 191; v. 20;
    <i>Romeo and Juliet</i>, ii. 2. 115-ii. 85; v. i. 40-ii. 148;
    <i>Taming of the Shrew</i>, i. 1. 39-i. 428, n. 1;
    <i>Tempest</i>, i. 2. 355-iv. 5, n. 3; iv. 1. l0-iv. 25, n. 3;
iv. 1. 53-ii. 467, n. 1.
<i>Shakespeare Illustrated</i>, i. 255.
<i>'Sh'apprens t'etre vif,'</i> ii. 463.
SHARP, James, Archbishop of St. Andrews, v. 39, n. 2, 61, 65, 68.
SHARP, John, Archbishop of York, i. 452, n. 2.
SHARP, Dr. John, i. 487, 517.
SHARP, J., ii. 69, n. 1.
SHARP, Miss, v. 68.
SHARP, Samuel, <i>Letters from Italy</i>, ii. 57, n. 2; iii. 55.
SHARPE, Rev. Gregory, ii. 130.
SHARPE, Mr., a surgeon, i. 357.
SHAVERS, a thousand, iii. 163.
SHAVINGTON HALL, v. 433, n. 2.
SHAW, Cuthbert,
  account of him, ii. 31;
  tutor to Lord Chesterfield, iii. 140, n. 1.
SHAW, Professor, of St. Andrews, v. 64, 68, 70.
SHAW, Dr. Thomas, iv. 112.
SHAW, Rev. William,
  <i>Erse Grammar</i>, iii. 106, 107;
  <i>Proposals</i> written by Johnson, ib.;
  pamphlet on <i>Ossian</i>, iv. 252-3;
  mentioned, iii. 214.
<i>She Stoops to Conquer</i>. See GOLDSMITH.
SHEBBEARE, Dr. John,
  <i>Battista Angeloni</i>, iv. 113;
  Boswell becomes acquainted with him, iv. 112;
    praises him, iii. 315; iv. 113;
  Johnson, joined with, in the <i>Heroic Epistle</i>, v. 113;
    and in parliament, iv. 318, n. 3;
  <i>Letters on the English Nation</i>, iv. 113;
  <i>Letters to the People of England</i>, iii. 315, n. 1; iv. 113;
  libel, tried for, iii. 15, n. 3;
  payment as a reviewer, iv. 214;
  pension, ii. 112, n. 3; iii. 79, n. 1;
  pillory, sentenced to the, iii. 315: iv. 113, n. 1;
  'She-bear,' iv. 113, n. 2.
SHEET OF A REVIEW, iv. 214, n. 2.
SHEFFIELD, Lord. _See _HOLROYD, John.
SHEFFORD, iv. 131.
SHELBURNE, second Earl of (afterwards first Marquis of Lansdowne),
  Bentham praises him as a minister, iv. 174, n. 4;
  Bolingbroke, Lord, i. 268, n. 3;
  Burke, speaks with malignity of, iv. 191, n. 4;
  Bute's, Lord, character, ii. 353, n. 1, 363, n. 4;
  Chambers, Sir R., ii. 264, n. 1;
  Chatham's, Lord, opinion of schools, iii. 12, n. 1;
  coarse manners, iv. 174;
  Crown—its power increased by Lord Bute, iii. 416, n. 2;
  Douglas, last Duke of, v. 43, n. 4;
  Douglas, Lord, ii. 230, n. 1;
  Dunning and Lord Loughborough, iii. 240, n. 3;
  economy, rules of, iii. 265;
  education, iii. 36, n. 1; iv. 174, n. 3;
  Fitzpatrick's brother-in-law, iii. 388, n. 3;
  French—their superficial knowledge, ii. 363, n. 4;
  George III, letter from, iii. 241, n. 2;
  Ingenhousz, Dr., ii. 427, n. 4;
  'Jesuit of Berkeley Square,' iv. 174, n. 5;
  Johnson's character of him, iv. 174;
    intimacy with him, iv. 191, 192, n. 2;
  King, Dr. William, i. 279, n. 5;
  'Lord, his parts pretty well for a,' iii. 35;
  Lowther the miser, v. 112, n. 4;
  <i>Malagrida</i>, iv. 174;
  Mansfield, Lord, in the copyright case, 1. 437, n. 2;
    at Oxford, ii. 194, n. 3;
    untruthfulness, ii. 296, n. 2;
  ministry, iv. 158, n. 4, 170, n. 1, 174, n. 3;
  peace of 1782-3, iv. 158, n. 4, 282, n. 1;
  petition for his impeachment, ii. 90, n. 5;
  portrait by Reynolds, iv. 174, n. 5;
  Price, Dr., iv. 434;
  Priestley's account of the company at his house, iv. 191, n. 4;
  Scotch—their superficial knowledge, ii. 363, n. 4;
    untruthfulness, ii. 296, n. 2, 301, n. 5;
    painstaking habits, ib.;
  Secretary of State at the age of twenty-nine, iii. 36, n. 1;
  Streatham, rents Mrs. Thrale's house at, iv. 158, n. 4;
  Tories and Jacobites, i. 429, n. 4;
  Townsend, Alderman, iii. 460; iv. 175, n. 1;
  mentioned, ii. 177, n. 1.
SHELLEY, Lady, iv. 159, n. 3.
SHENSTONE, William,
  Dodsley's <i>Cleone</i>, the sale of, i. 325, n. 3;
  hair, wore his own, i. 94, n. 5;
  'I prized every hour,' &amp;c., iv. 145, n. 6;
  inn, lines in praise of an, ii. 452;
  Johnson, admiration of, ii. 452;
    account of him, v. 267, 457, nn. 2 and 4;
    estimate of his poems, ii. 452;
    writes to him, v. 268, n. 1;
  layer-out of land, v. 267;
  Leasowes, v. 457;
  letters, his, v. 268;
  London streets in 1743, i. 163, n. 2;
  <i>Love Pastorals</i>, v. 267;
  Pembroke College, member of, i. 75; iv. 151, n. 2;
  pension, v. 457;
  Pope's condensation of thought, v. 345;
  'She gazed as I slowly withdrew,' v. 267;
  witty remark on divines and the tree falling, iv. 226.
SHERIDAN, Charles, iii. 284.
SHERIDAN, Mrs. Frances,
  wife of Thomas Sheridan the son, i. 358, 386, n. 1, 389.
SHERIDAN, Richard Brinsley
  (grandson of Dr. Thomas Sheridan and son of Thomas Sheridan),
  birth, i. 358, n. 2;
  Comedies, dates of his, iii. 116, n, 1;
  <i>Duenna</i>, run of the, iii. 116, n. 1;
  father, estranged from his, i. 388, n. 1;
    despises his oratory, i. 394, n. 2;
  funeral, i. 227, n. 4;
  Johnson, compliments, in a Prologue, iii. 115;
    praises his comedies, iii. 116;
    projects an attack on, ii. 315, n. 3;
  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;
    election, iii. 116;
    present, iii. 230, n. 5;
  marriage, ii. 369;
  Round-Robin, signs the, iii. 83;
  <i>Sydney Biddulph</i> and <i>The School for Scandal</i>, i. 390, n. 1.
SHERIDAN, Dr. Thomas (the father),
  anecdote of Swift and a country-squire, iv. 295, n. 5;
  'Sherry,' ii. 258, n. 1.
SHERIDAN, Thomas (the son, father of R. B. Sheridan),
  Addison's loan to Steele, iv. 91;
  America, threatens to go to, iv. 2l5;
  Boswell's instructor in pronunciation, ii. 159;
    puns with, iv. 316;
  conversation, ii. 122;
  <i>Dictionary</i>, ii. 161;
  Dublin Theatre, i. 386;
  dull naturally, i. 453;
  <i>Earl of Essex</i>, iv. 312, n. 5;
  formal endings of letters, criticises, v. 239;
  good, but a liar, iv. 167;
  Home's gold medal, ii. 320; v. 360;
  house in Bedford Street, i. 485, n. 1;
  insolvent debtor, iii. 377;
  Irish Parliament compliments him, iii. 377;
  Johnson, account of, i. 385;
    antipathy to the Scotch, iv. 169;
    attack on Swift, iv. 61; v. 44, n. 3;
    describes his acting, i. 358; ii. 88;
      his reading, iv. 207;
    pension, i. 374;
    quarrels with, i. 385; iii. 115;
      attacks him, i. 388; ii. 88;
      irreconcileable, i. 387; iv. 222, 330;
  <i>Lectures on the English Language</i>, i. 385
    (See below, Oratory);
  lies of vanity, iv. 167;
  <i>Life of Swift</i>, i. 388; ii. 88, 319, n. 1;
  miser, maintains the happiness of a, iii. 322;
  'Old Mr. Sheridan,' iv. 207, n. 1;
  oratory, at Bath, i. 394;
    at Dublin, ib., n. 2;
    described by Dr. Parr, ib.;
    despised by his son, ib.;
    laughed at by Johnson, i. 453; ii. 87; iv. 222;
    'enthusiastic about it as ever,' iv. 207;
  pension, i. 385-6;
  'Sherry derry,' ii. 258;
  son's marriage, his, ii. 369;
    quarrels with him, i. 388, n. 1;
  Wedderburne, taught, i. 386;
    found him ungrateful, iii. 2;
  vanity and Quixotism, ii. 128.
SHERLOCK, Dr.,
  <i>On Providence</i>, iv. 300, n. 2;
  style elegant, iii. 248;
  mentioned, iv. 311.
SHERLOCK, Rev. Martin, iv. 320, n. 4.
SHERWIN, J. K., iii. 111.
SHIELS, R.,
  Johnson's amanuensis, i. 187, 241;
  share in Cibber's <i>Lives of the Poets</i>, i. 187; iii. 29-31, 37, 117.
SHIP,
  worse than a gaol, i. 348; ii. 438; v. 137, 249;
  misery of the sailors' quarters, iii. 266;
  hospital, ib,, n. 2;
  worse than a Highland inn, v. 147.
  See SAILORS.
<i>Ship of Fools</i>, i. 277.
SHIPLEY, Bishop of St. Asaph,
  army chaplain, an, iii. 251; v. 445;
  assemblies, his, iv. 75, n. 3;
  Franklin, Dr., a friend of, iv. 246, n. 4;
  Johnson dines with him in Passion-week, iv. 88, n. 1;
    visits his palace, v. 437;
  knowing and conversible, iii. 250, n. 2; iv. 246;
  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;
    election, iv. 75, n. 3;
    present, iv. 326;
  Reynolds's dinner, at, iii. 250-5;
  rout, at a, iv. 75;
  mentioned, iv. 1, n. 1, 48, n. 1.
SHIRT,
  changes of, v. 60;
  clean-shirt days, i. 105.
SHOE-BUCKLES, iii. 325; v. 19.
SHOP-KEEPERS, of London, v. 81, 83.
SHOPS,
  a stately one, iv. 319;
  turn the balance of existence, v. 27, n. 4.
SHORE, Jane, v. 49, n. 2.
SHORT-HAND, i. 136; ii. 224; iii. 270.
SHREWSBURY,
  Circuit, ii. 194;
  Johnson visits it, v. 454-5;
  mentioned, ii. 441.
SHROPSHIRE, i. 39, n. 1.
SHRUBBERY, a, iv. 128.
<i>Shuckford's Connection</i>, iv. 311.
SIAM, King of, iii. 336.
<i>Sibbald, Life of Sir Robert</i>, iii. 227.
<i>Sicilian Gossips</i>, iv. 2.
SICK MAN,
  consolation in finding himself not neglected, iv. 234;
  duty of telling him the truth, iv. 306;
  impossible to please, iv. 311;
  his thoughts, iv. 362.
SICK WOMAN, church service for a, v. 444.
SICKNESS, at a friend's house, iv. 181.
SIDDONS, Mrs.,
  described by Mrs. Piozzi, v. 103, n. 1;
  Johnson, visits, iv. 242;
  Reynolds compliments her, ib., n. 2;
  in <i>The Stranger</i>, iv. 244, n. 1.
<i>Side</i>, ii. 155.
SIDNEY, Algernon, ii. 210.
SIDNEY, Sir Philip,
  as an authority for a <i>Dictionary</i>, iii. 194, n. 2;
  misprint in a quotation from him, iii. 131, n. 2.
<i>Sidney Biddulph</i>, i. 358, n. 4, 389.
<i>Siege</i>, a popular title for a play, iii. 259, n. 1; v. 349, n. 1.
<i>Siege of Aleppo</i>, iii. 259, n. 1.
<i>Siege of Marseilles</i>, v. 349, n. 1.
SIENNA, iv. 373, n. 1.
SIGHT of great buildings, ii. 385, 393.
SIGNS, conversation by, ii. 247.
SILENCE of Carthusians, absurd, ii. 435.
SILK, v. 216.
SILK-MILL, iii. 164.
SILVER BUCKLES, iii. 325.
SIMCO, John, iv. 421, n. 2.
SIMILE, when made by the ancients, iii. 73.
SIMPSON, Joseph,
  account of him, iii. 28;
  Johnson's letter to him, i. 346;
  mentioned, i. 488; ii. 476.
SIMPSON, Thomas, the mathematician, i. 351, n. 1.
SIMPSON, Rev. Mr., iii. 359.
SIMPSON, Mr., of Lichfield (father of Joseph Simpson), i. 81, 346.
SIMPSON, Mr., Town-clerk of Lichfield, iv. 372, n. 2.
SIMPSON, Mr., of Lincoln, ii. 16.
SIMPSON, Mr., owner of a vessel, v. 279-284, 286.
SIN,
  balancing sins against virtues, iv. 398;
  heinous, ii. 172;
  original, iv. 123.
SINCLAIR, Sir John, iv. 136.
SINCLAIR, Robert, iii. 335, n. 1.
SINCLAIR, Mr., stabbed by Savage, i. 125, n. 4.
SINGULARITY,
  Johnson's dislike of it, ii. 74, n. 3;
  making people stare, ii. 74;
  the gentleman in <i>The Spectator</i>, ii. 75.
  See under AFFECTATION.
SINNERS, chief of, iv. 294.
SION HOUSE, iii. 400, n. 2.
<i>Sister, The</i>, iv. 10, n. 1.
SIXTEEN-STRING JACK, iii. 38.
SIXTUS QUINTUS, V. 239.
SKENE, General, v. 142, n. 2.
SKENE, Sir John, iii. 414, n. 3.
SKINNER, Stephen, i. 186.
SLANDER, action for, iii. 64.
SLATER, Mr., the druggist, iii. 68.
SLAUGHTER'S COFFEE-HOUSE, i. 115, n. 1; iv. 15.
SLAVES and SLAVERY,
  Bathurst, Dr., on it, iv. 28;
  Boswell's justification of it, iii. 200, 203-5, 212;
  drivers of negroes, iii. 201;
  England's guilt, ii. 479;
  Georgia, i. 127, n. 4;
  Grainger's <i>Sugar Cane</i>, i. 481, n. 4;
  Johnson's hatred of it, ii. 478-480; iii. 200-4;
    toast to an insurrection, ii. 478; iii. 200;
  religious education, ii. 27, n. 1;
  Slavetrade, abolition of it attempted, iii. 203-4;
    England's hypocrisy in upholding it, ii. 480;
    London Alderman's defence of it, iii. 203, n. 1;
  Walpole's, Horace, hatred of slavery, iii. 200, n. 4.
  See KNIGHT, Joseph, SOMERSET, James, and under SCOTLAND, serfs.
SLEEP,
  quantity needful, iii. 169;
  sleep-walking, v. 46.
SLEEPLESSNESS, 'light a candle and read,' iv. 409, n. 1.
SLOE, 'bringing the sloe to perfection,' ii. 78.
SLUYS, iii. 447.
SMALBROKE, Dr., i. 134.
SMALRIDGE, George, Bishop of Bristol, iii. 248.
SMART, Christopher (Kit),
  account of him, i. 306, n. 1;
  Derrick, compared with, iv. 192;
  <i>Hop Garden</i>, ii. 454, n. 3;
  madness, i. 397; ii. 345;
  <i>Rambler</i>, praises the, i. 208, n. 3;
  <i>Universal Visitor</i>, contract about the, ii. 345;
    Johnson wrote for him, ib.;
  mentioned, iv. 183, n. 2.
SMART, Mrs. Christopher,
  Johnson's letters to her, in. 454! iv. 358, n. 2.
SMART, Mrs. Newton, iv. 8, n. 3.
SMELT, Mr., iv. i, n. 1.
SMITH, Adam,
  absence of mind, iv. 24, n. 2;
  Barnard's verses, mentioned iii, iv. 433;
  blank verse, dislikes, i. 427;
  Boswell attends his lectures, v. 19;
    praised by him, ib., n. 1;
    attacks his <i>alliance</i> with Hume, v. 30, n. 3;
  bounty on corn, iii. 232, n. 1;
    on herring-busses, v. 161, n. 1;
  composed slowly, v. 66, n. 3;
  conversation, iii. 307, n. 2; iv. 24, n. 2;
  decisive professorial manner, iv. 24;
  Glasgow and Brentford, iv. 186; v. 369;
  gold, importation of, iv. 104, n. 3;
  'hotbed of genius,' raised in a, ii. 53, n. 1;
  Hume's <i>Dialogues on Natural Religion</i>, i. 268, n. 4;
    letter from, iv. 194, n. 1;
    <i>Life</i>, iii. 119; v. 30-2, 369, n. 5;
    suggested knocking of his  head against, iii. 119;
  Johnson, altercation with, iii. 331;
    imaginary altercation, v. 369, n. 5;
    compared with, iv. 24, n. 2;
    Dictionary_, reviews, i. 298, n. 2;
    knowledge of books, i. 71;
    meeting with, i. 427;
    preface to his <i>Shakespeare</i>, i. 496, n. 4;
  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479; iii. 128, n. 4;
    elected when the club had 'lost its select merit,' ii. 430, n. 1;
  Macdonald,  Sir J., death of, i. 449, n. 2;
  Macpherson's <i>Ossian</i>, ii. 302, n. 2;
  Milton's shoe-latchets, v. 19;
  Oxford student, i. 503; iv. 391, n. 1;
  philosophers and porters, i. 102, n. 2;
  Professor of Logic, v. 369, n. 2;
  Professor of Moral Philosophy, v. 369, n. 3;
  Select Society, member of the, v. 393, n. 4;
  <i>Theory of Moral Sentiments</i>, v. 30, n.;
  Universities,
    reflection on English, iii. 13, n. 1, 14, n. 1; iv. 391. n. 1.
  <i>Wealth of Nations</i>, publication of, ii. 429-30;
    condemned by the Inquisition, i. 465, n. 1;
    Johnson's ignorance of it, ii. 430, n. 1;
    valued by Boswell, v. 30, n. 3.
SMITH, Captain, iii. 362.
SMITH, Edmund,
  expulsion from Oxford, ii. 187, n. 3;
  _Life, quoted, i. 75, n. 5, 81;
  lines on Pococke, iii. 269.
SMITH, General, Foote's <i>Nabob,</i> iii. 23, n. 1.
SMITH, 'Gentleman,' the actor, ii. 208, n. 5.
SMITH, John, Lord Chief Baron, iv. 152, n. 3; v. 27.
SMITH, Rev. Mr., vicar of Southill, iv. 126, 330.
SMITH, Sydney, v. 360, n. 1.
SMITH, William, Bishop of Lincoln, v. 445, n. 3.
SMITH, Mr., ii. 116.
SMOKING,
  gone out, v. 60;
  sedative effect, i. 317; v. 60.
SMOLLETT, Commissary,
  'solid talk,' v. 365;
  monument to Dr. Smollett, v. 366.
SMOLLETT, Dr. Tobias,
  Blackfriars Bridge, praises, i. 351, n. 1;
  British coffee-house club, iv. 179, n. 1;
  Churchill, attacked by, i. 419, n. 1;
  <i>Critical Review</i>, edits the, iii. 32, n. 2;
    attacks Griffiths and the <i>Monthly</i>, ib.;
  Cumming the Quaker, v. 98, n. 1;
  epitaph, v. 367;
  feudal system, v. 106, n. 3;
  French houses, ii. 388, n. 2;
    meat and cookery, ii. 402, n. 2;
    <i>valets de place</i>, ii. 398, n. 2;
  grumbler, a great, as a traveller, iii. 236, n. 2;
  Hamilton the bookseller, ii. 226, n. 3;
  heritable jurisdictions, v. 177, n. 1;
  <i>Humphry Clinker</i> described by H. Walpole, i. 351, n. 1;
  Johnson's <i>Debates</i>, i. 505-6;
  Johnson and he 'never cater-cousins,' i. 349;
  Londoners and the Battle of Culloden, v. 196, n. 3;
  Lyttelton, Lord, afraid of him, iii. 33;
  monument, v. 366;
    Johnson corrects the inscription, v. 367;
  <i>Ode on Leven Water</i>, v. 367, n. 2;
  <i>Tears of Scotland</i>, v. 196, n. 3;
  <i>Travels</i> criticised by Thicknesse, iii. 235-6;
  Wilkes, letter to, i. 348;
  quotations, &amp;c. from his works—
    <i>Humphry Clinker</i>, authors sleeping on bulks, i. 457, n. 2;
      in the pillory, iii. 315, n. 1;
      Bath described, iii. 45, n. 1;
      Butcher Row, i. 400, n. 2;
      Edinburgh Cawdies, iv. 129, n. 1;
      Edinburgh a hot-bed of genius, ii. 53, n. 1;
      Elibank, Lord, v. 386, n. 1;
      'gardy loo,' v. 22, n. 3;
      <i>Hemisphere</i>, ii. 81, n. 2;
      Highland funeral, v. 332, n. 2;
      libels, i. 116, n. 1;
      Methodists, ii. 123, n. 2;
      <i>Ossian</i>, ii. 302, n. 2;
      Psalmanazar, George, iii. 443;
      Queensberry, Duke of, ii. 368, n. 1;
      Quin at Bath, iii. 264, n. 1;
      Scotch, English prejudice against the, ii. 300, n. 5;
      Scotch churches, dirtiness of, v. 41, n. 3;
      Scotland as little known as Japan, v. 392, n. 6;
      Smollett's, Commissary, house, v. 365, n. 1;
      St. Andrews, v. 61, n. 5;
      <i>straw</i> in Bedlam, ii. 374, n. 2;
      whisky as a medicine for infants, v. 346, n. 2;
    <i>Peregrine Pickle</i>,
      governor, v. 185, n. 2;
      Lady Vane, v. 49, n. 4;
    <i>Roderick Random</i>,
      'cham,' i. 348, n. 5;
      finding a person comprehension, iv. 313, n. 4;
      hospital on a man-of-war, iii. 266, n. 2;
      <i>loblolly boy</i>, i. 378, n. 1;
      Lyttelton,  Lord, said to be abused in it, iii. 33, n. 1.
SMOLLETT, Mrs., v. 366.
SMUGGLING, iii. 188, n. 5.
SNAILS and Dissenters, ii. 268, n. 2.
SNAKES, concerning, iii. 279.
SNOWDON, ii. 284; v. 451.
SOBIESKI, King, v. 185, n. 4, 200.
SOCIAL ATTENTIONS, i. 477.
SOCIETY,
  condition upon which all societies subsist, ii. 374;
  duty to it, v. 62;
  external advantages of great value, i. 440;
  held together by respect for birth, ii. 153;
  right to prohibit propagation of dangerous opinions, ii. 249;
  submitting to its determinations, v. 87;
  truth, held together by, iii. 293.
SOCIETY OF ARTISTS, i. 363;
  <i>Preface to the Catalogue</i>, ib., n. 2, 367.
<i>Society of Arts and Sciences</i>,
  Johnson  tries to speak there, ii. 139;
    is recommended by Hollis, iv. 97;
  votes against a Scotchman, iv. 11;
  mentioned, iv. 92, n. 5.
SOCIETY for Conversation, iv. 90.
SOCIETY for the Encouragement of learning, i. 153, n. 2.
SOCIETY FOR THE PROPAGATION OF THE GOSPEL,
  Archbishop Markham's Sermon, v. 36, n. 3;
  bequest of slaves made to it, iii. 204, n. 1.
SOCIETY FOR PROPAGATING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE, ii. 27-30, 279; v. 370.
SOCRATES,
  compared with Charles XII, iii. 265;
  education, on, iii. 358, n. 2;
  learnt to dance, iv. 79;
  passing through the fair at Athens, i. 334, n. 2;
  reduced philosophy to common life, i. 217.
SODOR AND MAN, Bishop of, iii. 412.
<i>Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris</i>, iv. 181, n. 3.
SOLANDER, Dr.,
  account of him, v. 328;
  proposed expedition, ii. 147, 148; iii. 454.
<i>Soldiers Letter</i>, i. 156.
SOLDIERS,
  breeding, their, ii. 82;
  character high, iii. 9;
  common soldiers usually gross, iii. 9;
  Coronation, at the, iii. 9, n. 2;
  courage, iii. 266;
  deaths from gaol fever, iv. 176, n. 1;
  Dicey, Professor,
    on the difficulties of their position, iii. 46, n. 5;
  English stronger than French, v. 229;
  estimation in which they are held, iii. 265-6;
  fame, get little, v. 137;
  France, respect paid to them in, iii. 10;
  governed by want of agreement, ii. 103;
  insolence, iii. 9, nn. 2 and 3;
  Johnson's estimate of them in his talk and study, iii. 266-7;
  Mutiny Act, iii. 9, n. 4;
  officers, their ignorance, v. 398;
    respected, iii. 9;
    superiority of their accommodation, iii. 361, 365;
  pay, ii. 218;
  peace, in time of, iii. 267, n. 1;
  quartered in inns, ii. 218, n. 1; iii. 9, n. 4;
  real life and modern fiction, in, ii. 134, n. 3;
  regularity, want of, iii. 266, n. 4;
  relish of existence, iii. 413, n. 4;
  riches in them do not excite anger, v. 328;
  shot at for five-pence a day, ii. 250;
  trial of two soldiers for murder, iii. 46, n. 5.
SOLICITORS, iv. 128-31. See ATTORNEYS.
SOLITUDE, Burton's warning against it, iii. 415.
  See under JOHNSON, solitude.
SOMERS, Lord,
  patron of learning, v. 59, n. 1;
  mentioned, ii. 157, n. 3.
SOMERSET, James, a negro,
  account of his case, iii. 87, n. 3, 212; v. 401, n. 3;
  Hargrave's <i>Argument</i> quoted, v. 401, n. 3;
  Knight the negro reads his case, iii. 214, n. 1.
SOMERSET, Duchess of, i. 452, n. 2.
SOMERSETSHIRE, iii. 226, n. 2.
SOMERVILLE, Lord, iv. 50.
SOMMELSDYCK, family of, v. 25, n. 2.
<i>Somnium</i>, i. 60.
SORROW,
  inherent in humanity, v. 64;
  remedies for it, ib., n. 2;
  useless, iii. 137, n. 1.
  See GRIEF.
SOUND, beauty in a simple sound, ii. 191.
SOUTH, Dr. Robert,
  Johnson criticises his <i>Sermons</i>, iii. 248;
    recommends his <i>Sermons on Prayer</i>, ii. 104.
<i>South Briton</i>, a libel, iv. 318, n. 3.
SOUTH SEA, voyages to the, ii. 247; iii. 8; iv. 308.
<i>South Sea Report</i>, i. 157.
SOUTH SEA SCHEME,
  Dr. Young loses by it, iv. 121;
  Fenton's advice to Gay, v. 60, n. 4.
SOUTHAMPTON, Lord, ii. 323, n. 1.
SOUTHEY, Robert,
  <i>Adventurer</i>, i. 252, n. 2;
  Colman and Lloyd, ii. 334, n. 3;
  correcting <i>doggedly</i>, v. 40, n. 3;
  dreams, i. 235, n. 2;
  English historians, ignorance of, v. 220, n. 1;
  <i>Gentleman's Magazine</i>, despises the, iv. 437;
  Georgia, settlement of, i. 127, n. 4;
  <i>Methodists</i>, origin of the term, i. 458, n. 3;
  poet-laureate, i. 185, n. 1;
  Robertson's, Dr., omissions, ii. 238, n. 1; v. 220, n. 1;
  Robinson, Sir T., i. 434, n. 3;
  supernatural appearances, iii. 298, n. 1;
  walks, the habit of taking long, i. 64, n. 4;
  want of readiness, ii. 256, n. 3;
  Wesley's manners, iii. 230, nn. 3 and 4;
  Wesley warned by 'a serious man,' v. 62, n. 5;
  Westminster School, account of, iii. 12, n. 3;
  Whitefield's oratory, ii. 79, n. 4; v. 36, n. 1;
  <i>Whole Duty of Man</i>, ii. 239, n. 4.
SOUTHILL, the residence of Squire Dilly,
  Boswell visits it in 1779, iii. 396;
  Boswell and Johnson in 1781, i. 260; iv. 118;
  the church, i. 315; iv. 122.
SOUTHWELL, Thomas, second Lord, i. 243; iii. 380;
  'most qualified man,' iv. 174.
SOUTHWELL, Mr., i. 362.
SOUTHWELL, Robert, the Jesuit, v. 444.
SPACE, <i>quasi sensorium numinis</i>, v. 287.
SPAIN, Boswell, David, lives there, n. 195, n. 3;
  embassy to it in 1766, ii. 177;
  expedition to Scotland in 1719, v. 140, n. 3;
  exportation of coin, iv. 105, n. 1;
  Johnson attacks it in <i>London</i>, i. 130, 455;
    in <i>Lives of Blake and Drake</i>, i. 147, n. 5;
    wishes that it should be travelled over, i. 365, 410, 455; iii. 454;
  Spanish invasion, fears of a, iii. 360, n. 3;
  treaty of peace of 1782-83, iv. 282, n. 1.
SPANISH PLAYS, iv. 16.
SPANISH PROVERBS, i. 73, n. 3; iii. 302.
SPARTA, ii. 176; iii. 293.
SPEAKING, of another, iv. 32;
  of oneself, iii. 323;
  public speaking, ii. 139, 339.
SPEARING, Mr., an attorney, i. 132, n. 1.
<i>Spectator</i>,
  Addison, badness of the part not written by, iii. 33;
  Baretti, read by, iv. 32;
  Bonn's edition, iv. 190, n. 1;
  Bouhours quoted, ii. 90, n. 3;
  bows of the Spectator's banker, i. 440, n. 1;
  <i>British Princes</i>, ii. 108, n. 3;
  curious epitaph, iv. 358, n. 2;
  edition with notes, ii. 212;
  end of its publication, i. 201, n. 3;
  <i>Epilogue to the Distressed Mother</i>, i. 181, n. 4;
  'find
  variety in one,' iii. 424, n. 2;
  Freeport, Sir Andrew, ii. 212, n. 2;
  'Gentleman, The,' ii. 182;
  Grove's paper on Novelty, iii. 33;
  Hockley in the Hole, iii. 134, n. 1;
  Kurd's notes, iv. 190, n. 1;
  Ince's papers, iii. 33, n. 3;
  Indian King at St. Paul's, i. 450, n. 3;
  Johnson praises it, ii. 370;
  milking a ram, i. 444, n. 1;
  motto to No. 379, v. 25, n. 2;
  Osborne's <i>Advice to a Son</i>, ii. 193, n. 2;
  paper of notanda, i. 205;
  <i>Philip Homebred</i>, iii. 34;
  Pope's letter to Steele, iii 420, n. 2;
  Psalmanazar ridiculed, iii. 449;
  reputation enjoyed by chance
  writers in it, iii. 33; singularity, ii. 75;
  Two-penny Club, iv. 254, n. 1;
  <i>Whole Duty of Man</i>, i. 216, n. 1:
  See under ADDISON.
SPEDDING, James, <i>Bacon's Works</i>, i. 431, n. 2.
SPEECH-MAKING, a knack, iv. 179.
SPELLING, in the seventeenth century, v. 299, n. 1.
  See JOHNSON, spelling.
SPENCE, Rev. Joseph, account of him, v. 317;
  <i>Anecdotes</i>, iv. 63; v. 414;
  Blacklock's poetry, i. 466;
  Pope visits him at Oxford, iv. 9;
  mentioned, ii. 84, n. 2.
SPENCER, second Earl, member of the Literary Club, i. 479.
SPENCER, Lady, iii. 425, n. 3.
SPENSER, Edmund, Bunyan, read by, ii. 238;
  <i>Dictionary</i>, as an authority for a, iii. 194, n. 2;
  George III suggests that Johnson should write his <i>Life</i>,
ii. 42, n. 2; iv. 410;
  imitations of him, iii. 158, n. 4;
  <i>Ruines of Rome</i>, iii. 251, n. 1;
  'Spenser, Mr. Edmund,' iv. 325, n. 3.
SPHINX, the, iii. 337.
SPINOSA, i. 268, n. 2; iii. 448.
SPIRIT, evidence for. See JOHNSON, spirit.
SPIRITS. See GHOSTS.
SPIRITS, evil, iv. 290.
<i>Spiritual Quixote</i>,
  its author, a member of Pembroke College, i. 75, n. 3;
    and a friend of Shenstone, i. 94, n. 5; ii. 452, n. 4;
  on clean shirts, v. 60, n. 4.
SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS,
  felicity of drunkenness cheaply attained by them, iii. 381, n. 3;
  misery caused by them, ii. 435, n. 7; iii. 292, n. 1;
  pleasant poison, v. 346, n. 2.
<i>Spleen, The</i>, iii. 38, 405.
SPLENDOUR, iv. 337.
SPOONER, Rev. Mr., v. 73.
SPOTTISWOODE, Dr., ii. 323, n. 2.
SPOTTISWOODE, John, iii. 326-7.
SPRAT, Bishop,
  <i>History of the Royal Society</i>, iv. 311;
  <i>Life</i> quoted, i. 34, n. 5;
  meets Bentley, v. 274, n 4;
  style, iii. 257, n. 3.
SQUILLS, iv. 355.
<i>Squire Richard</i>, iv. 284.
SQUIRES, Rev. Mr., i. 208, n. 3.
STAGE, Mr., iv. 257, n. 2.
STAFFORD, ii. 164, n. 5.
STAFFORDSHIRE,
  fruit, very little, iv. 206;
  Jacobite fox-hunt, iii. 326, n. 1;
  nursery of art, iii. 299, n. 2;
  Toryism, its, ii. 461;
  two young Methodists from it, ii. 120;
  Whig, a Staffordshire, iii. 326.
STAGE. See PLAYERS.
STAGE-COACHES, i. 340, n. 1. See COACH.
STAIR, Earl of, v. 372.
ST. ALBAN'S,
  Boswell and Johnson pass the night there, iii. 4;
  monument to John Thrale, i. 491, n. 1;
  mentioned, ii. 459; iv. 80, n. 1.
ST. ALBAN'S, first Duke of, i. 248, n. 2.
ST. ASAPH, ii. 284; v. 436.
ST. AUBYN, Sir John, i. 508.
ST. AUGUSTINE,
  '<i>misericordia domini inter pontem et fontem</i>' iv. 212, n. 2;
  weighed against Jonathan Wild plus three-pence, iv. 291.
ST. CAS, expedition to, i. 338, n. 2.
ST. COLUMBA, v. 335, 337, 338.
ST. CROSS, at Winchester, iii. 124.
ST. CUTHBERT'S DAY, at University College, ii. 445.
ST. GLUVIAS, i. 436.
ST. IGNATIUS LOYOLA, i. 77.
ST. JEROME, ii. 358, n. 3.
ST. JOHN. See BOLINGBROKE.
ST. MALO,
  expedition sent against it, i. 338, n. 2;
  mentioned, ii. 82, n. 3.
ST. PAUL,
  'chief of sinners,' iv. 294;
  converted by supernatural interposition, iii. 295;
  fear of being a cast-away, iv. 123;
  saw unutterable things, ii. 123;
  thorn in the flesh, v. 64;
  'warring against the law of his mind,' iv. 396.
ST. PETERSBURGH, iv. 277, n. 1.
ST. QUINTIN, ii. 401.
ST. VITUS'S DANCE, i. 143.
STAMP ACT, Burke's speeches, ii. 16.
STANHOPE, first Earl, i. 160.
STANHOPE, third Earl,
  presided at a meeting of the Revolution Society, iv. 40, n. 4.
STANHOPE, fifth Earl,
  on the author of <i>Captain Carleton's Memoirs</i>, iv. 334, n. 4.
STANHOPE, Mr. (Lord Chesterfield's son),
  Boswell's description of him, i. 266, n. 2;
  Johnson's, iv. 333, n. 1;
  Harte, Dr., his tutor, iv. 78, n. 1. 333:
  See CHESTERFIELD, Earl of, Letters to his Son.
STANHOPE, Mr., mentioned in Tickell's <i>Epistle</i>, iii. 388, n. 3.
STANISLAUS, King, ii. 405, n. 1.
STANLEY, Dean,
  <i>Memorials of Westminster Abbey</i>—Ephraim Chambers's epitaph,
i. 219, n. 1;
  Goldsmith's epitaph and Johnson's Latin, iii. 82, n. 3;
  Johnson's and Macpherson's graves, ii. 298, n. 2.
STANTON, Mr., manager of a company of actors, ii. 464, 465.
STANYAN, Temple, iii. 356.
STAPYLTON, family of, v. 442, n. 3.
<i>Starvation</i>, ii. 160, n. 1.
STATE,
  its right to regulate religion, ii. 14; iv. 12;
  the vulgar are its children, ii. 14; iv. 216.
<i>State</i> used for <i>statement</i>, iii. 394.
STATE OF NATURE, v. 365.
<i>State Trials</i>, i. 157.
STATIONERS' COMPANY, ii. 345.
STATIUS, i. 252.
STATUARY, ii. 439.
STATUES, reason of their value, iii. 231.
STAUNTON, Dr. (afterwards Sir George),
  Johnson's letter to him, i. 367;
    <i>Debates</i>, iv. 314.
'<i>Stavo bene, &amp;c.</i>,' ii. 346.
STEELE, Joshua, <i>Prosodia Rationalis</i>, ii. 327.
STEELE, Mr., of the Treasury, i. 141.
STEELE, Sir Richard,
  Addison's loan, iv. 52, 91;
  <i>Apology</i>, ii. 448, n. 3;
  <i>British Princes</i>, ridicules the, ii. 108, n. 2;
  <i>Christian Hero</i>, ii. 448;
  <i>Conscious Lovers</i>, i. 491, n. 3;
  grammar-schools, account of, i. 44, n. 2;
  Ince, praise of, iii. 33;
  Marlborough's,  Duke of, papers, v. 175, n. 1;
  old age, ii. 474, n. 3;
  'practised the lighter vices,' ii. 449.
STEEVENS, George,
  Boswell complains of his unkindness, iii. 281, n. 3;
    praises his principles, iii. 282;
  character by Garrick and Parr, iii. 281, n. 3;
  Chatterton's poems, iii. 50, n. 5;
  Courtenay's <i>Poetical Review</i>, mentioned in, i. 223;
  Davies, Tom, sneers at, i. 390, n. 3;
  Fox's election to the Club, ii. 274, n. 7;
  generosity, iii. 100;
    assists Mrs. Goldsmith, ib.;
  <i>Hamlet</i>, proposed emendation of, ii. 204, n. 3;
  Hawkins, attacked by, iv. 406, n. 1;
  Johnson,
    anecdotes of, iv. 324;
      not trustworthy, ib., n. 1;
    epitaph, iv. 444;
    aids, in the <i>Lives</i>, iv. 37;
    interpretation of two passages in <i>Hamlet</i>, iii. 55, n. 2;
    letters to him, ii. 273; iii. 100;
    levee, attends, ii. 118;
    'the old lion,' ii. 284, n. 2;
    reflection  on Garrick, ii. 192, n. 2;
    and the spunging-house, i. 303, n. 1;
    and Torre's fireworks, iv. 324;
  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;
    election, ii. 273;
    present, ii. 318;
  literary impostures, his, iv. 178, n. 1;
  outlaw, leads the life of an, ii. 375;
    deserves to be hanged or kicked, iii. 281;
    anonymous attacks, iv. 274;
  Rochester's <i>Poems</i>, castrates, iii. 191;
  Shakespeare, edits, ii. 114, 204;
  Shakespearian editors, i. 497, n. 3;
  mentioned, ii. 58, 107; iii. 354, 386; iv. 438.
STELLA (Mrs. Johnson), ii. 389, n. 1.
<i>Stella in Mourning</i>, i. 178.
STEPHANI, the,
  Henry Stephens' <i>Greek Dictionary</i>, ii. 74, n. 1;
  Maittaire's <i>Stephanorum Historia</i>, iv. 2;
  what they did for literature, iii. 254.
STEPHENS, Alexander, Beckford's speech to the King, iii. 201, n. 3.
STEPNEY, George, iv. 36, n. 4.
STERNE, Rev. Laurence,
  beggars, iv. 32, n. 4;
  death, ii. 222, n. 1;
  dinner engagements, ii. 222;
  Goldsmith  calls him a blockhead, ii. 173, n. 2;
    and 'a very dull fellow,' ii. 222;
  indecency, ii. 222, n. 2;
  Johnson's opinion of him, ii. 222;
  Monckton, Miss,  finds him pathetic, iv. 109;
  <i>Sentimental Journey</i>, imitation of it, ii. 175;
  <i>Sermons</i> read by Johnson in a coach, iv. 109, n. 1;
    seen by him at Dunvegan, v. 227;
  <i>Tristram Shandy</i>, Burns's bosom favourite, i. 360, n. 2;
    'did not last,' ii. 449;
    Farmer, Dr., foretells that it will be speedily forgotten,
ii. 449, n. 3;
    Gray mentions it, ii. 222, n. 1;
    Harris's <i>Hermes</i>, anecdote of, ii. 225, n. 2;
    Walpole describes it as 'the dregs of nonsense,' ii. 449, n. 3;
    references to it, 'daily regularity of a clean shirt,' v. 60, n. 4;
    <i>Lilliburlero</i>, ii. 347, n. 2.
STEVENAGE, iii. 303.
STEVENS, R., a bookseller, i. 330, n. 3.
STEVENSON, Dr., v. 369.
STEWART, Sir Annesly, iv. 78.
STEWART, Commodore, v. 445.
STEWART, Dugald,
  authorship in Scotland, ii. 53, n. 1;
  existence of matter, i. 471, n. 2;
  Glasgow University, at, v. 369, n. 3;
  Hume's Scotticisms, ii. 72, n. 2;
  Select Society, The, v. 393, n. 4;
  Smith's, Adam, conversation, iii. 307, n. 2;
    peculiarities, iv. 24, n. 2.
STEWART, Francis,
  Johnson's amanuensis, i. 187;
  Johnson buys his old pocket-book, iii. 418, 421;
    and a letter, iv. 262, 265.
STEWART, George, bookseller of Edinburgh, i. 187.
STEWART, Sir James, iii. 205, n. 1.
STEWART, Mr., sent on a secret mission to Paoli, ii. 81.
STEWART, Mrs., iii. 418, 421; iv. 262, 265.
STILL, John, Bishop of Bath and Wells, iv. 420, n. 3.
STILLINGFLEET, Benjamin, iv. 108.
STINTON, Dr., iii. 279; iv. 29.
STOCKDALE, Rev. Percival,
  account of him, ii. 113, n. 2;
  Johnson's defence of drunkenness, ii. 435, n. 7;
    on dictionary-making, ii. 203, n. 3;
    on expectations, i. 337, n. 1;
    <i>Works</i>, edits two volumes of, i. 190, n. 4; 335, n. 3;
  <i>Remonstrance, The</i>, ii. 113;
  Russia, offered a post in, iv. 277, n. 1;
  St. Andrews, lodgings at, v. 65, n. 4;
  mentioned, ii. 148.
STOICK, the, in <i>Lucian</i>, iii. 10.
STONE, Mr., iii. 143, n. 1.
STONEHENGE, iv. 234, n. 2.
STOPFORD, General, ii. 376.
STORMONT, seventh Viscount (afterwards second Earl of Mansfield),
v. 362, n, 1.
STORY, Thomas, the Quaker, i,68, n. 1.
STORY, its value depends on its being true, ii. 433.
STOURBRIDGE,
  Johnson at the school, i. 49; v. 456, n. 1;
  the town formerly in the parish of Old Swinford, v. 432.
STOW, Richard, i. 163, n. 1.
STOWE, iii. 400, n. 2.
STOWELL, Lord. See SCOTT, William.
STRAHAN, Andrew, iv. 371.
STRAHAN, Rev. George, Vicar of Islington (son of William Strahan),
  attends Johnson when dying, iv. 415-6;
  Johnson's bequest to him, iv. 402, n. 2;
    <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, edits, i. 235, n. 1; ii. 476; iv. 376-7;
      omits some passages, iv. 84, n. 4;
    visits him, iv. 271, 415;
    will, witnesses, iv. 402, n. 2;
  mentioned, ii. 37, n. 1; iv. 49.
STRAHAN, William, the King's Printer,
  purchaser in whole or in part of Blair's <i>Sermons</i>, iii. 97;
    <i>Cook's Voyages</i>, ii. 247, n. 5;
    <i>Duke of Berwick's Life</i>, iii. 286;
    <i>Gibbon's Decline and Fall</i>, ii. 136, n. 6; iii. 97, n. 3;
    Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>, i. 287; iv. 32l;
      <i>Journey to the Western Isles</i>, ii. 94;
      <i>Patriot</i>, ii. 288;
      <i>Rasselas</i>, i. 341;
    Mackenzie's <i>Man of Feeling</i>, i. 360;
  Boswell's praise of him, i. 288;
  breakfast and dinner at his house, ii. 321; iii. 400;
  coach, keeps his, ii. 226;
  Elphinston's <i>Martial</i>, iii. 258;
  epigram, how far a judge of an, iii. 258;
  Franklin's letter to him on their rise in the world, ii. 226, n. 2;
    on the American war, iii. 364, n. 1;
  Gordon Riots, iii. 428-9, 435;
  Hume left him his manuscripts, ii. 136, n, 6;
    corrected Hume's style, v. 92, n. 3;
  Johnson's altercation with Adam Smith, iii. 331;
    attempts to bring, into Parliament, ii. 137-9;
    difference with, iii. 364;
    friendly agent, ii. 136;
    interested in one of his apprentices, ii. 323;
    letter to him, iii. 364;
    letters to Scotland, franked, iii. 364;
    one of a deputation to, iii. 111;
  <i>London Chronicle</i>, printer of the, iii. 221;
  member of parliament, ii. 137;
  obtuse, iii. 258;
  Robertson's style, corrected, v. 92, n. 3;
  small certainties, on, ii. 322;
  Smith's, Adam, letter to him, v. 30;
  Spottiswoode, Dr., his greatgrandson, ii. 323, n. 2;
  Warburton's letter, shows, v. 92-3;
  Wedderburne, anecdote of, ii. 430;
  mentioned, i. 243, 303, n. 1; ii. 34, n. 1, 282, 310.
STRAHAN, Mrs. (wife of William Strahan),
  Johnson's letters to her, iv. 100, 140;
  mentioned, i. 212.
STRAHAN, William, junior, death, iv. 100.
STRAITS OF MAGELLAN, v. 225.
<i>Stranger, The</i>, iv. 244, n. 1.
STRATAGEM, iii. 275, 324, n. 3.
STRATFORD-ON-AVON,
  Boswell and Johnson drink tea there, ii. 453;
  Jubilee, ii. 68;
  Shakespeare's mulberry-tree, ii. 470.
<i>Stratford Jubilee, The</i>, ii. 471.
STRATICO, Professor, i. 371.
STRAW, balancing a, iii. 231.
<i>Straw, beating his</i>, ii. 374.
STREATHAM,
  Church, Thrale's monument, iv. 85, n. 1;
    Johnson's farewell, iv. 159;
  Common, ii. 72, n. 1;
  Thrale's Villa, Boswell's first visit to it, ii. 77;
    visit in 1778, iii. 225;
    dining-room, iii. 348;
      luxurious dinners, iii. 423, n. 1;
    Johnson gives a bible to one of the maids, iii. 247;
      'home,' i. 493, n. 3; iii. 405, n. 6, 451;
      laboratory, iii. 398, n. 3;
      last dinner, iv. 159, n. 1;
      musing over the fire, ii. 109, n. 2;
      parting use of the library, iv. 158;
        library, compared with the one at St. Andrews, v. 64, n. 1;
      pictures round it, iv. 158, n. 1;
    'none but itself can be its parallel,' iii. 395, n. 1;
    Omai dines there, iii. 8;
    Shelburne, Lord, let to, iv. 158, n. 4;
    summerhouse, iv. 134;
  village, iii. 451;
  mentioned, iii. 392.
STREETS, passengers who excite risibility, i. 217.
STRICHEN, Lord, v. 107, n. 1.
STRICKLAND, Mrs., iii. 118, n. 3.
STRIKES in London, iii. 46, n. 5.
STUART, Andrew,
  duel with Thurlow, ii. 230, n. 1;
  <i>Letters to Lord Mansfield</i>, ii. 229-30, 475.
STUART, Gilbert, iii. 334, n. 1.
STUART, Hon. Colonel James (afterwards Stuart-Wortley),
  Boswell, accompanies him to London, iii. 399;
    to Lichfield, iii. 411;
    to Chester, iii. 413;
  raises a regiment, iii. 399;
    ordered to Jamaica, iii. 416, n. 2.
STUART, Rev. James, of Killin, ii. 28, n. 2.
STUART, Hon. and Rev. W., iv. 199.
STUART, Mrs. ii. 377, n. 1.
STUART, the House of,
  Johnson defends it, i. 354;
    has little confidence in it, i. 430;
    maintains its popularity, iii. 155-6; iv. 165;
    his tenderness for it, i. 176;
  right to the throne, ii. 220; iii. 156; v. 185, n. 4, 202-4;
  Scotch Episcopal Church, faithful to it, iii. 371;
  Scotch non-jurors give up their allegiance, iv. 287;
  Voltaire sums up its story, v. 200;
  mentioned, ii. 26.
STUART CLAN, ii. 270.
STUBBS, George, iv. 402, n. 2.
<i>Student, The, or Oxford and Cambridge Miscellany</i>, i. 209, 228.
STUDIED BEHAVIOUR, i. 470.
STUDY,
  all times wholesome for it, iv. 9;
  Johnson's advice to Boswell, i. 410, 457, 460, 474; iii—407;
    five hours a day sufficient, i. 428;
  particular plan not recommended, i. 428;
  studying hard, i. 70.
<i>Stultifying</i> oneself, v. 342.
STYLE,
  elegance universally diffused, iii. 243;
  foreign phrases dragged in, iii. 343, n. 3;
  Hume and Mackintosh on English  prose, iii. 257, n. 3;
  Johnson's dislike of Gallicisms, i. 439;
  metaphors, iii. 174; iv. 386, n. 1;
  peculiar to every man, iii. 280;
  seventeenth century style bad, iii. 243;
  studiously formed, i. 225;
  Temple gave cadence to prose, iii. 257;
  unharmonious periods, iii. 248;
  which is the best? ii. 191.
  See under ADDISON and JOHNSON.
STYLE, Old and New, i. 236, n. 2, 251.
SUARD,
  Johnson introduces him to Burke, iv. 20, n. 1;
  Voltaire and Mrs. Montague, ii. 88, n. 3.
SUBORDINATION,
  breaking the series of civil subordination, ii. 244;
  broken down, iii. 262;
  conducive to the happiness of society, i. 408, 442; ii. 219;
iii. 26; v. 353;
  essential for order, iii. 383;
  feudal, ii. 262; v. 106;
  French happy in their subordination, v. 106;
  grand scheme of it, i. 490;
  high people the best, iii. 353;
  Johnson's great merit in being zealous for it, ii. 261;
  Mrs. Macaulay's footman, i. 447; iii. 77;
  mean marriages to be punished, ii. 328-9;
  men not naturally equal, ii. 13;
  promoted by a Corsican hangman, i. 408, n. 1;
  without it no intellectual improvement, ii. 219.
SUBSCRIPTION to the Thirty-nine Articles. See THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES.
SUCCESSION, male,
  Boswell and the Barony of Auchinleck, ii. 413-423;
  Johnson's advice to Boswell, ii. 415-423;
    his zeal for it in Langton's case, ii. 261;
  as regards the Thrale family, ii. 469; iii. 95.
SUCKLING, Sir John, <i>Aglaura</i>, iii. 319, n. 1.
SUENO, King of Norway, v. 289.
SUETONIUS, i. 433, n. 1; iii. 283, n. 1.
<i>Sufflamina</i>, i. 273.
SUFFOLK,
  militia bill of 1756, i. 307, n. 4;
  price of wheat in 1778, iii. 226, n. 2.
SUFFOLK, Lady, ii. 342, n. 1.
SUGAR, taken in the servant's fingers, ii. 403; v. 22.
<i>Sugar Cane, a Poem</i>. See GRAINGER, James.
SUGER, Abbot, iii. 32, n. 5.
SUICIDE,
  Baxter on the salvation of a suicide, iv. 225;
  civil suicide, iv. 223;
  Fitzherbert's 'melancholy end,' ii. 228;
  going to the devil where a man <i>is</i> known, v. 54;
  Johnson supposed to recommend it, iv. 150;
  martyrdom a kind of voluntary suicide, ii. 250;
  motives that lead to it, ii. 228-9.
SUIDAS, i. 277, n. 4.
SULPITIUS, iii. 36, n. 2; iv. 374, n. 5.
SUNDAY,
  abroad a day of festivity, ii. 72, n. 1;
  bird-catching on it, ii. 72, n. 1;
  harvest work, iii. 313;
  heavy day to Johnson when a boy, i. 67;
  legal consultations, ii. 376;
  militia exercise, i. 307, n. 4;
  reading, v. 323;
  relaxation allowed but not levity, v. 69;
  scheme of life for it, i. 303;
  throwing stones at birds, v. 69.
SUNDERLAND, iii. 297, n. 2.
SUNDERLAND, third Earl of,
  Lowther the miser, v. 112, n. 4;
  mentioned, i. 160.
'<i>Sunk upon us</i>,' ii. 148.
SUPERFOETATION of the Press, iii. 332.
SUPERIORITY, iv. 164.
SUPERNATURAL AGENCY, general belief in it, v. 45.
SUPERNATURAL APPEARANCES,
  evidence of them, ii. 150;
  use of them, iii. 298, n. 1:
  See GHOSTS, WITCHES; and under SCOTLAND, Hebrides, second-sight.
SUPERSTITIONS, not necessarily connected with religion, v. 306.
  See under BOSWELL and JOHNSON.
SUPPER, a turnpike, iii. 306.
SURINAM, v. 25, n. 2, 357.
SURNAMES, easily mistaken, iv. 190.
SURREY, militia bill of 1756, i. 307, n. 4.
SUSPICION, often a useless pain, iii. 135.
<i>Suspicious Husband, The</i>, ii. 50.
<i>Suspirius</i>, i. 213; ii. 48.
SUSSEX,
  militia bill of 1756, i. 307, n. 4;
  price of wheat in 1778, iii. 226, n. 2;
  violence of the waves on its coast, v. 251, n. 2.
SUSSEX, Duke of, ii. 152, n. 2.
SUTER, Mr., v. 164, n. 2.
SWALLOWS, their hibernation, ii. 55, 248.
SWAN, Dr., i. 153.
SWANSEA, i. 164.
SWARKSTONE, i. 79, n. 2.
SWEARING,
  Court of Justice, in a, v. 390;
  conversation, in,—causes of the custom, ii. 166;
  genteel people swear less than formerly, ii. 166, n. 1;
  Johnson disapproves of it, ii. 111; iii. 4l;
    represented as swearing in Dr. T. Campbell's <i>Diary</i>, ii. 338, n. 2;
    shows his displeasure, iii. 189.
SWEDEN,
  Johnson promised a letter of good-will from it, i. 323;
    wishes to visit it, iii. 454; v. 215;
  torture used there, i. 467, n. 1.
SWEDEN, King of, knights Dr. Hill, ii. 38, n. 2.
SWEDEN, King of (Gustavus III),
  Boswell wishes to see him, v. 215;
  his death, iii. 134, n. 1.
<i>Sweden, History of</i>, by Daline, ii. I56.
SWEET-MEATS, iii. 186; iv. 90.
SWIFT, Jonathan,
  <i>Advice to the Grub-Street  Verse Writers</i>, i. 143, n. 1;
  affectation of familiarity with the great, iv. 62;
  anonymously, published, ii. 319;
  <i>Apology for the Tale of a Tub</i>, ii. 319, n. 1;
  <i>Artemisia</i>, ii. 76, n. 3;
  <i>Beggar's Opera</i>, opinion of the, ii. 369, n. 1;
  Bettesworth, Sergeant, iii. 377, n. 1;
  Blackmore, Sir Richard, ii. 108, n. 2; iv. 80, n. 1;
  broomstick, could write finely on a, ii. 389, n. 1;
  <i>Conduct of the Allies</i>, ii. 65;
  death, troubled by thoughts of, ii. 93, n. 4;
    what reconciles us to it, iii. 295, n. 2;
  Delany's <i>Observations</i>: See DELANY;
  <i>Drapier's Letter</i>, ii. 319;
  Dryden's prefaces, iv. 114, n. 1;
  <i>Epistle to Captain Gulliver</i>, v. 139;
  <i>Eugenia</i>, ii. 240, n. 4;
  Faulkner, G., ii. 154, n. 3;
  feared by a country squire, iv. 295, n. 5;
  flowered late, iii. 167, n. 3;
  French writers superficial, i. 454, n, 3;
  frugal but liberal, iii. 265, n. 1;
  Gay's writings for children, ii. 408, n. 3;
  geniuses united, the power of, i. 206;
  Glover's <i>Leonidas</i>, v. 116, n. 4;
  Goldsmith on his 'strain of pride,' iii. 165, n. 3;
  Grimston, Viscount, iv. 80, n. 1;
  <i>Gulliver's Travels</i>, ii. 319;
    quoted in Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>, ib., n. 3;
    brought its author money, iii. 20, n. 1;
  happiness, definition of, ii. 351, n. 1;
  Hawkesworth's <i>Life</i> of him, i. 190, n. 3;
  <i>History of John Bull</i>, v. 44, n. 4;
  Howard, Hon. Edward, ii. 108, n. 2;
  inferior to his contemporaries, v. 44;
  Ireland his debtor, ii. 132;
    reception there in 1713, iii. 249, n. 6;
    return to it in 1714, iii. 249, n. 6;
  Johnson's attacks on him, i. 452; ii. 65, 318; iv. 61; v. 44;
    recommended to him, i. 133; iv. 61;
    worse than Swift,' v. 211;
    writes his Life, iv. 61-3;
  <i>Journal</i>, iv. 177;
  laugh, did not, ii. 378, n. 2;
  <i>Letter to Tooke the Printer</i>, ii. 319, n. 1;
  <i>Lines on Censure</i>, ii. 61, n. 4;
  low life, love of, v. 307, n. 3;
  Manley, Mrs., satirised in <i>Corinna</i>, iv. 200, n. 1;
  <i>Memoirs of Scriblerus</i>, i. 452, n. 2; v. 44, n. 4;
  <i>Miscellanies in Prose and Verse</i>, i. 125, n. 4;
  <i>Ode for Music</i>, ii. 67, n. 1;
  <i>On the death of Dr. Swift</i>, iii. 441, n. 3;
  original in a high degree, ii. 319, n. 2;
  Orrery's, Lord, <i>Remarks</i>: See ORRERY, fifth Earl of;
  'paper-sparing Pope,' i. 142;
  payment for writing, iii. 20, n. 1;
  <i>Plan for the Improvement of the English Language</i>, ii. 319;
  <i>Poetry; a Rhapsody</i>, ii. 108, n. 2;
  Pope's condensation of sense, v. 345, n. 2;
    parting with, iii. 312;
  P. P. <i>clerk of this parish</i>, i. 383, n. 3;
  Prendergast, attacks, ii. 183, n. 1;
  projectors, i. 301, n. 3;
  <i>Rules to Servants</i>, ii. 148, n. 2;
  Sacheverell's sermon at the end of his suspension, i. 39, n. 1;
  saving, habit of, iv. 61-2;
  <i>scoundrel</i>, use of, iii. 1, n. 2;
  'screen between me and death,' iii. 441, n. 3;
  <i>Sentiments of a Church of England man</i>, ii. 319, n. 1;
  <i>Sermon on the Trinity</i>, ii. 319, n. 1;
  shallow fellow, a, v. 44, n. 3;
  singularities, given to, ii. 74, n. 3;
  'spectacles and pills,' iv. 285;
  Steele, lines on, i. 125, n. 4;
  Stella's 'artifice of mischief,' v. 243;
  <i>Stella's birthday</i>, iv. 181, n. 3, 285, n. 2;
  strong sense his excellence, i. 452;
  study, hours of, ii. 119, n. 2;
  style, a good neat, ii. 191;
    according to Hume not correct, ib., n. 3;
    praised by him, iii. 257, n. 3;
  Tale of a Tub,
    doubts as to the authorship, i. 452; ii. 318, 319, n. 1;
    he gives a copy to Mrs. Whiteway, i. 452, n. 2;
    lost him a bishopric, i. 452, n. 2;
    much superior to his other writings, ii. 318; v. 44;
    quotations from it
      Boswell like Jack, ii. 235;
      dirtiness of the Scotch churches, v. 41, n. 3;
   Temple's style, iii. 257, n. 3;
   'washed himself with oriental scrupulosity,' iv. 5, n. 2;
   'Whiggism and Atheism,' i. 431, n. 1.
SWIMMING. See JOHNSON, swimming.
SWINFEN, Dr. Samuel,
  Johnson's godfather, i. 34, n. 2;
    consults him about his health, i. 64;
    intimate with him, i. 80, 83;
    kind to his daughter, iii. 222, n. 3;
    leaves a legacy to his grandson, iv. 440;
  Pembroke College, a member of, i. 58, n. 1.
SWINNEY. See MAC SWINNY, Owen.
SWINTON, Rev. Mr., i. 273.
SWISS,
  Johnson praises their wonderful policy, i. 155;
  suffer from the <i>maladie du pays</i>, iii. 198.
SWISS GUARDS, iv. 282, n. 2.
SYDENHAM, Dr. Thomas,
  <i>Life</i> by Johnson, quoted, i. 38;
    published, i. 153;
  Locke's Latin verses, v. 93;
  St. Vitus's dance, i. 143.
SYDNEY, Algernon, ii. 210.
SYLVANUS'S <i>First Book of the Iliad</i>, iii. 407.
<i>Sylvanus Urban</i>, i. 111.
SYMPATHY, ii. 94-5, 469-471; iii. 149.
SYNOD, 'A Synod of Cooks,' i. 470.
SYNONYMES, iv. 207.
<i>System of Ancient Geography</i>, i. 187.
<i>Système de la Nature</i>, v. 47.
SZEKLERS, ii. 7, n. 3.</p>

<h3>T.</h3>

<p id="id00867" style="margin-left: 0%; margin-right: 0%">T', fitted to a, iv. 288.
TAAF, Mr., ii. 398.
TACITUS,
  <i>Agricola</i>, quoted, iii. 324, n. 5; iv. 204;
  <i>Germania</i>, quoted, v. 381;
  his writings are notes for an historical work, ii. 189.
TAILOR, the metaphysical. See METAPHYSICAL.
TAIT, Rev. Mr., v. 128.
TAIT, Mr., an organist, v. 84.
TALBOT, Lord Chancellor, i. 232, n. 1.
TALBOT, second Lord, i. 507, 508.
TALBOT, Miss Catharine,
  correspondence with Mrs. Carter, i. 232, n. 1;
  Greenwich Park, describes, i. 106, n. 2;
  <i>Rambler</i>, contributes to the, i. 203;
    criticises it, i. 208, nn. 2 and 3;
  Williams, Mrs., account of, i. 232, n. 1.
<i>Tale of a Tub</i>. See SWIFT.
TALES, telling tales of oneself, ii. 472.
TALK,
  above the capacity of the audience, iv. 185;
  distinguished from conversation, iv. 186;
  Johnson loved to have it out, iii. 230;
  talking for fame, iii. 247;
    from books, v. 378;
    of oneself, iii. 57;
    on one topic, ib.
TALKERS, exuberant public, ii. 247.
TALLEYRAND, v. 397, n. 1.
TALLOW-CHANDLER, in retirement, ii. 337.
TAMEOS, v. 242, n. 1.
TANNING, v. 246.
TAR, v. 216.
TARTARY, ii. 156.
<i>Tartuffe</i>, ii. 321, n. 1; iii. 449.
TASKER, Rev. Mr., iii. 373-5.
TASSO, borrows a simile from Lucretius, iii. 330.
TASTE,
  changes in it, iii. 192, n. 2;
  defined, ii. 191;
  refinement of it, iv. 338;
  Reynolds's rule for judging it, iv. 316.
<i>Tatler</i>,
  end of its publication, i. 201, n. 3;
  esquire, title of, i. 34, n. 3;
  rural esquires, v. 60, n. 4;
  great perfections without good breeding, ii. 256, n. 3.
<i>Tatler Revived</i>, i. 202.
TAUNTON, iv. 32.
TAVERNS,
  admitting women, iv. 75;
  felicity of England in its tavern life, ii. 451;
  tavern chair the throne of human felicity, ii. 452, n. 1.
<i>Taxation no Tyranny</i>,
  account of it
    planned, ii. 292;
    published, ii. 312;
    written at the desire of ministers, i. 373, n. 2; ii. 313;
    corrected by them, ii. 313-5;
    not attacked enough, ii. 335;
    pelted with answers, ii. 336, n. 1;
    sale, ii. 335, n. 4;
  Birmingham traders praised, ii. 464, n. 3;
  drivers of negroes, iii. 201;
  Macaulay, Mrs., attacked, ii. 336, n. 2;
  mentioned, iii. 221.
TAXES, effect of their increase, ii. 357.
TAYLOR, Chevalier, a quack, iii. 389-39.
TAYLOR, Jeremy,
  'chief of sinners,' iv. 294;
  <i>Golden Grove</i>, iv. 295;
  <i>Holy Dying</i>, iii. 34, n. 3.
TAYLOR, Rev. Dr. John,
  account of him and his establishment, ii. 473;
    his person, ii. 474;
    his character by Johnson, ii. 474; iii. 139, 181;
  all his geese swans, iii. 189;
  Ashbourne, his daily life, iii. 132; iv. 378;
    the water-fall, iii. 190;
    garden, iii. 199;
  bleeding, habit of, iii. 152;
  Boswell, gives, particulars of Johnson, iv. 375;
    laughed at by, iii. 135, n. 2;
    and Johnson visit him in 1776, ii. 473;
      in 1777, iii. 135;
  bull-dog, his, iii. 189;
  bullocks, his talk is of,' iii. 181;
  cattle, iii. 150, 181, n. 3;
  chandelier of crystal, iii. 157;
  Christ Church, Oxford, enters, i. 76;
  dinners at his London house, iii. 52, 238;
  eagerness for preferments, ii. 473, n. 1;
  'elegant phraseology,' his, ii. 474, n. 1;
  Garrick's emphasis, anecdote of, i. 168;
    mediates between Garrick and Johnson, i. 196;
  house in Westminster, i. 238; iii. 222;
  Johnson's character, iii. 150
    company, not very fond of, iii. 181;
    correspondence with, iii. 180, n. 3:
      See under JOHNSON, letters;
    dread of annihilation, iii. 296, n. 2;
    funeral, iv. 420;
    heart, knowledge of, i. 26, n. 1;
    invites, to dine on a hare, iii. 207;
    Reynolds's explanation of his intimacy with, iii. 180;
    roars him down, iii. 150;
      himself roused to a pitch of bellowing, iii. 156;
    serious talk with him, iii. 296, n. 2;
    wearies of Ashbourne life, iii. 154, 211; iv. 356, 357, n. 3,
362, 365, 378;
    will, not in, iv. 402, n. 2;
    writes sermons for him, i. 241; iii. 181;
    youth, friend of, iv. 270;
  Johnson's, Mrs., death, i. 238; iii. 180, n. 3;
  Langley, quarrels with, iii. 138, n. 1;
  lawsuit, ii. 474, n. 1; iii. 44, n. 3, 51, n. 3;
  Lichfield School, at, i. 44;
  living in ruins and rubbish, iv. 378;
  matriculation, i. 76;
  neighbours, iii. 138;
  sermons, iii. 181-2;
  sleep, observation on, iii. 169;
  Whig, a, ii. 474; iii. 156;
  widower, anecdote of a, iii. 136;
  wife, separation from his, i. 472, n. 4;
  wit, single instance of his, iii. 191;
  mentioned, ii. 464, 468; iii. 185, 187.
TAYLOR, Mrs., Rev. Dr. John Taylor's wife,
  separated from her husband, i. 472, n. 4;
  mentioned, i. 239.
TAYLOR, John, a Birmingham trader, i. 86.
TAYLOR, John, of Christ Church, Oxford,
  confounded with Dr. John Taylor, i. 76, n. 1.
TAYLOR, John (<i>Demosthenes</i> Taylor), iii. 318.
TAYLOR, William, of Norwich, ii. 408, n. 3.
TAYLOR, Mr., an engraver, iv. 421, n. 2.
TAYLOR, Mr., a gentleman-artist, of Bath, iii. 422.
TEA,
  Garrick charges Peg Woffington with making it too strong, iii. 264;
    his finest sort, i. 216, n. 3;
  Hanway's attack on its use, and
  Johnson's defence, i. 313;
  Johnson a hardened tea-drinker, i. 103, n. 3:
    see under JOHNSON;
  price of it in 1734, i. 313, n. 2;
  run tea, v. 449, n. 1;
  tea-making <i>à  l'Anglaise</i>, ii. 403;
  weak, generally made, iii. 264, n. 4;
  Wesley attacks its use, i. 313, n. 2.
TEACHING, wretchedness of, i. 85.
<i>Tears of Old May-day,</i> i. 101.
<i>Telemachus, a Mask</i>, i. 411; ii. 380.
TEMPÉ, iii. 302.
TEMPLE, second Earl, iv. 249, n. 3.
TEMPLE, Right Rev. Frederick, Bishop of London, i. 436, n. 3.
TEMPLE, Rev. William Johnson,
  account of him, i. 436; iii. 416, n. 3;
  Boswell, correspondence with, i. 436, n. 3;
    and he read Gray all night, ii. 335, n. 2;
    executor, iii. 301, n. 1;
    last letter written to him, i. 14, n. 1;
    occupies his chambers in the Temple, i. 437;
    visits him at Mamhead, ii. 371;
  Gray's character,  writes, i. 436, n. 3; ii. 316; iv. 153, n. 1;
  Johnson, compares, with the 'infidel pensioner Hume,' ii. 316;
    introduced to, ii. 11;
  political speculations, unfit for, ii. 312, n. 4;
  mentioned, i. 433, n. 3; ii. 3, n. 2, 247.
TEMPLE, Sir William,
  drinking by deputy, iii. 330;
  Dutch free from spleen, iv. 379;
  English prose, gave cadence to, iii. 257;
  great generals, ii. 234;
  <i>Heroic Virtue</i>, ii. 234, n. 4;
  Ireland, ancient state of, i. 321;
  peerages and property, ii. 421;
  style condemned by Hume, iii. 257, n. 3;
    praised by Mackintosh, ib.;
    a model to Johnson, i. 218.
TEMPLE OF FAME, ii. 358.
TEMPTATION, exposing people to it, iii. 237.
TENANTS, their independence, v. 304:
  See LANDLORDS, and under SCOTLAND, Hebrides, landlords and tenants.
TENDERNESS OF HEART, v. 240.
<i>Tenders</i>, v. 196, n. 1.
TENERIFFE, iv. 358.
TENISON, Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury,
  Psalmanazar introduced to him, iii. 447.
TENNYSON, Alfred, Lord, poet-laureate, i. 185, n. 1;
  <i>Ulysses</i> quoted, v. 278, n. 2.
TENURES, ancient, ii. 202; iii. 414.
TERENCE, quoted, i. 129, n. 1; ii. 358, n. 3, 465, n. 3.
TESTIMONY, compared with argument, iv. 281.
<i>Tetty</i> or <i>Tetsey</i>, i. 98.
THACKERAY, W. M.,
  Addison's <i>Cato</i>, quotations from, i. 199, n. 2;
    one failing, iv. 53, n. 4;
  <i>History of the Newcomes</i> quoted, ii. 300, n. 3;
  subscribed to the annuity for Johnson's goddaughter, iv. 202, n. 1.
THALES, i. 125, n. 4.
THAMES,
  Budgell drowns himself in it, ii. 229; v. 54;
  convicts working on it, iii. 268, n. 4;
  Johnson and Boswell row to Greenwich, i. 458;
    to Blackfriars, ii. 432;
    returns on it from Rochester, iv. 233, n. 2;
  <i>London</i>, mentioned in, i. 460;
  New-England men at its mouth, v. 317;
  ribaldry of passers-by, iv. 26.
THATCHING, v. 263.
<i>The one</i>, iv. 211, n. 2.
THEATRES,
  French and English compared in point of decency, ii. 50, n. 3;
  orange-girls, v. 185, n. 1;
  proposal for a third one, iv. 113:
  See under LONDON, Covent Garden, Drury Lane, and Haymarket.
THEBES, ii. 179.
THEFT, allowed in Sparta, ii. 176; iii. 293.
THELWALL, John, iv. 278, n. 3.
THEOBALD, Lewis,
  <i>Double Falsehood</i>, iii. 395, n. 1;
  Pope, attacked by, ii. 334, n. 1;
  Shakespeare, edits, v. 244, n. 2;
  Warburton, compared with, i. 329;
    helped by him, v. 80.
THEOCRITUS, iv. 2.
<i>Theodosius</i>, ii. 471.
<i>Theophilus Insulanus</i>, v. 225.
THEOPHRASTUS, v. 378.
THICKNESSE, Philip, criticises Smollett, iii. 235-6.
THIEVES, all men naturally thieves, iii. 271.
<i>Thing</i>, not <i>the</i>, iv. 89.
THINKING, liberty of, ii. 249, 252.
THIRLBY, Dr. Styan, iv. 161, n. 4.
THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES,
  articles of peace, ii. 104;
  meaning of subscription, ii. 151;
  petition for removing the subscription, ii. 150;
    motion to consider it, ii. 208, n. 4.
THOMAS, Colonel, iv. 211, n. 4.
THOMAS, Nathaniel, iii. 92, n. 2.
THOMSON, James,
  blank verse of the <i>Seasons</i>, iv. 42, n. 7;
  Boswell's assistance to  Johnson in his <i>Life</i>, ii. 63;
iii. 116, 133, 359;
  character, his, not to be gathered from his works, iii. 117, n. 7;
  cloud of words, iii. 37;
  <i>Edward and Eleonora</i> not licensed, i. 141, n. 1;
  family, account of his, iii. 359;
  Johnson inserts him among the <i>Lives</i>, iii. 109;
  letters to his sisters, ii. 64; iii. 117, 360;
  licentiousness, ii. 63; iii. 117;
  <i>Lives of Thomson</i>, iii. 116-7;
  'loathed much to write,' iii. 360;
  poetical eye, i. 453; ii. 63; iii. 37;
  'Queensberry, worthy,' ii. 368, n. 1;
  Quin's generosity to him, iii. 117;
  Scotland, never returned to, iii. 117;
  <i>Seasons</i>, quoted, i. 98, n. 1; iii. 151, n. 4;
    by Voltaire, i. 435, n. 2;
  sisters, generosity to his, ii. 64; iii. 360;
  wine, love of, i. 359.
THOMSON, Rev. James,
  case of ecclesiastical censure, iii. 58-64, 91.
THOMSON, Mr.,
  a schoolmaster (the poet's brother-in-law), ii. 64; iii. 116, 360.
THORNTON, Bonnell,
  <i>Adventurer</i>, writes for the, i. 252, n. 2;
  Boswell  enlivened by his witty sallies, i. 395;
  <i>Ode on St. Cecilia's Day</i>, i. 420;
  <i>Rambler</i>, parodies the, i. 218, n. 1;
  <i>Student</i>, writes for the, i. 209.
THORP, Mr. Robert, of Macclesfield, iv. 393. n. 3.
THORPE, iii. 359.
THOUGHTS,
  command of one's, ii. 190, 202, n. 2;
  inquisitive and perplexing, iv. 370, n. 3;
  troublesome at night, ii. 440;
  vexing, iii. 5.
<i>Thoughts on Executive Justice</i>, iv. 328, n. 1.
<i>Thoughts on the late Transactions respecting Falkland's Islands</i>.
  See <i>Falkland's Islands</i>.
THRALE FAMILY, account of the, i. 491, n. 1.
THRALE, John, a London merchant, i. 491, n. 1.
THRALE, 'Old,' the brewer, Henry Thrale's father, i. 490-1.
THRALE, Henry,
  account of him, i. 490, 494;
  ambition of out-brewing Whitbread, iii. 363, n. 5;
  Baretti, present to, iii. 97;
  Bath, visits, in 1776, iii. 44;
    in 1780, iii. 421;
  Boswell's  familiarity in speaking of him, i. 492, n. 1;
    hospitality to, iii. 45;
    writes to him, iii. 372;
  brewery,—profits, i. 491; iii. 210, 363, n. 5; iv. 87, n. 1;
    beer brewed, ii. 396; iii. 210, n. 5;
    £20,000 a year paid in excise, v. 130;
    first sale of it, i. 490;
    second sale, i. 491; iv. 86, n. 2, 132;
  Cator, John, one of his executors, iv. 313;
  champagne, his, iii. 119;
  churches, intends to beautify two Welsh, v. 450;
  death, iv. 84;
    false report of it, iii. 107;
  dinners and breakfasts at his house, ii. 77, 227, 246, 327,
338, n. 2, 349, 378, n. 1, 427; iii. 27, 248, 344; iv. 80;
  dislikes the times, iii. 363;
  eating, immoderate in, iii. 422-3; iv. 84, n. 4;
  expenses, iii. 210;
  France, tour to, ii. 384-401;
  Goldsmith's <i>Haunch of Venison</i>,  mentioned in, iii. 225, n. 2;
  questions a statement of his about horses, ii. 232;
  Gordon Riots, property in danger, iii. 435;
    flees from Bath, ib., n. 2;
  Grosvenor Square, house in, iv. 72;
  heir, desires a male, ii. 469; iii. 95, 363, n. 4;
  highwayman, robbed by a, iii. 239, n. 2;
  illness, dangerous, i. 322, n. 1; iii. 397, 423, n. 1;
    better, iii. 417, 420;
    withdrawn from business,  iii. 434;
    very ill, iv. 72;
    Baretti's account of it, iv. 84, n. 4;
  Italy, projected tour to, ii. 423;
    given up, iii. 6, 18, 27;
  Johnson's affection for him, iii. 397, n. 2; iv. 84-5, 89, 100;
    wishes to hear '<i>The History of the Thrales</i> v. 313;
      his feelings towards Johnson, ii. 77; iv. 84, 85, n. 1, 145, 340;
      'will go nowhere without him,' iii. 27, n. 3;
    and the Earl of Marchmont, iii. 345;
    epitaph on him, iv. 85, n. 1;
    his executor, iv. 85; receives a bequest of £200, iv. 86;
      guardian of his children, iv. 198, n. 4;
    illness in 1766, i. 521;
    intimacy not without restraint, iii. 7;
    introduction to his family, i. 490, 520; iii. 451;
    kitchen, inquires into, ii. 215, n. 4;
    loss by his death, iv. 85, 145, 157-9;
      prayer on it, i. 240, n. 5;
    suggests, as a member of parliament, ii. 137, n. 3;
    writes <i>The Patriot</i> for him, ii. 286;
  Lade, Sir John, his nephew, iv. 412, n. 1;
  melancholy, suffers from, iii. 363, n. 5;
    'worried by the <i>dog</i>,' iii. 414, n, 1;
  money difficulties, iv. 85, n. 2;
  'My Master,' i. 494, n. 3; iii. 119;
  portrait, iv. 158, n. 1;
  prospects, loves, v. 439, n. 2;
  receives £14,000, iii. 134, n. 1, 455;
  Rome, will not die in peace without seeing, iii. 27, n. 3;
  silent at Oglethorpe's, v. 277;
  society in his house, i. 496;
  son, loses his only surviving, ii. 468, 470;
    grief, his, iii. 18, n. 1;
    <i>orbus et exspes</i>, iii. 24, n. 5;
    at the Assembly Rooms, Bath, iii. 45, n. 2;
  son, loses his younger, iii. 4, n. 3;
  Southwark,
    Member for, i. 490;
    receives 'instructions' from the electors, ii. 73, n. 2;
    election of 1774, ii. 286, 287;
      of 1780, Johnson writes his <i>Addresses</i>, iii. 422, n. 1, 439-440;
    defeated, iii. 442;
    house in the Borough, ii. 286, n. 1; iii. 6; iv. 72, n. 1;
  Wales, tour to, ii. 285; v. 427-460;
  wife's, his, jealousy, iii. 96, n. 1;
  will, afraid of making his, iv. 402, n. 1;
    account of it, iv. 86, n. 1;
  mentioned, i. 83, n. 3; ii. 136, 311, 411; iii. 22-4, 54, n. 1, 126,
132, 158, n. 1, 190, n. 3, 222, 225, 240, 398, n. 3; v. 84, 102, n. 3.
THRALE, Henry (son of Mr. and Mrs. Thrale),
  death, ii. 468, 471; iii. 4;
  Johnson's letter on it, i. 236, n. 3;
    his love of him, ii. 469; iii. 4.
THRALE, Hester Lynch (Miss Salusbury, afterwards Mrs. Piozzi),
  account of her, i. 492-6;
    birth, i. 149, n. 5, 520;
    character by Johnson, i. 494;
      by Miss Burney, iv. 82, n. 4;
    dress and person, i. 494-5;
  accident to her eye, iii. 214;
  Argyll Street, house in, iv. 157, 164;
  Baretti, character of, ii. 57, n. 3;
    flatters her, iii. 49, n. 1;
    ignorance of the scriptures, v. 121, n. 4;
    knowledge of languages, i. 362, n. 1;
    quarrel with, ii. 205, n. 3; iii. 49, n. 1, 96;
      her account, ib., n. 1;
  Bath, visits, in 1776, iii. 6, 44;
    in 1780, iii. 421;
    an evening at Mrs. Montagu's, iii. 422;
    in 1783, iv. 166, 198, n. 4;
  Beattie, Dr., loves, ii. 148;
  Beauclerk's anecdote of the dogs, v. 329, n. 1;
  Beauclerk, hatred of, i. 249, n. 1; v. 329, n. 1;
  his truthfulness, ib.;
  birthplace, v. 449-51;
  Boswell,
    accuses, of spite, iv. 72, n. 1;
      of treachery, iv. 318, n. 1, 343;
    advises, not to publish the <i>Life of Sibbald</i>, iii. 228;
    alludes to her second marriage, iii. 49;
    argues with, on Shakespeare and Milton, iv. 72;
    brother David, iii. 434, n. 1;
    compliments, on his long head, iv. 166;
    controversy with, about Mrs. Montagu, v. 245;
    dines with her, iv. 166;
    hospitality to, iii. 45;
    introduced to her, ii. 77;
    'loves,' ii. 145, 206;
    MS. <i>Journal</i>, reads, ii. 383;
    proposes an epistle in her name, v. 139;
  <i>British Synonymy</i>, iv. 412;
  Burke's son, can make nothing of, iv. 219, n. 3;
  Burney, Miss, letters to, iv. 340, n. 3;
  calculating and declaiming, iii. 49;
  canvasses for Mr. Thrale, iii. 442, n. 1;
  character, influence of vice on, iii. 350;
  children, her,
    births, ii. 46, n. 3, 280; iii. 210, n. 4, 363, 393;
    deaths, ii. 281, n. 2; iii. 109;
    three living out of twelve, iv. 157, n. 3;
    unfriendly with her married daughter, v. 427, n. 1;
    Johnson's kindness to them, iv. 345;
  clerk, gives a crown to an old, v. 440;
  <i>clippers</i>, warned of, iii. 49;
  common-place book, iv. 343;
  conceit of parts, iii. 316;
  Congreve, quotes from, ii. 227;
  dates, neglects, i. 122, n. 2; iv. 88, n. 1;
  Demosthenes's 'action,' ii. 211;
  'despicable dread of living in the Borough,' iv. 72, n. 1;
  divorces, iii. 347-8;
  'dying with a grace,' iv. 300, n. 1;
  Errol, Lord, at the coronation, v. 103, n. 1;
  estate, prefers the owner to the, ii. 428;
  fall from her horse, ii. 287;
  Fermor's, Mrs., account of Pope, ii. 392, n. 8;
  flattery, coarse mode of, ii. 349;
    Johnson talks with her about it, v. 440;
  Foster's <i>Sermons</i>, quotes, iv. 9, n. 5;
  France, tour to, ii. 384-401;
  French, contentment of the, v. 106, n. 4;
    Convent, visits a, ii. 385;
    maxims, attacks, iii. 204, n. 1;
  Garrick's poetry, praises, ii. 78;
  good breeding, want of, iv. 83;
  Gordon Riots, alarmed at the, iii. 428, n. 4;
  Gray's <i>Odes</i>, admires, ii. 327;
  Grosvenor Square, removes to, iv. 72, n. 1;
  Hogarth's account of Johnson, i. 147, n. 2;
  illness, in 1779, iii. 397;
  inaccuracy,
    her extreme,
      in general, i. 416, n. 2; iii. 226, 229;
      no anxiety about truth, iii. 243, 404;
      her defence of it, iii. 228;
      instances of it—<i>Anecdotes</i>, iv. 340-7;
      anecdote about in <i>vino veritas</i>, ii. 188, n. 3;
    Barber's visit to Langton, i. 476, n. 1;
    Garrick's election to the Club, i. 481;
    Goldsmith and the <i>Vicar of Wakefield</i>, i. 415, 416, n. 2;
    Johnson's answer to Robertson, iii. 336, n. 2;
      and G. J. Cholmondeley, iv. 345;
      harshness, i. 410;
      lines on Lade, iv. 412, n. 1;
      mother calling <i>Sam</i>, iv. 94, n. 4;
      and small kindnesses, iv. 201, 343-4;
      <i>Verses to a Lady</i>, i. 92, n. 2;
    'natural history of the mouse,' ii. 194, n. 2;
    <i>sutile</i> mistaken for <i>futile</i>, iii. 284, n. 4;
  indelicacy, iv. 84, n. 4;
  insolence of wealth, shows the, iii. 316;
  interpolation in one of Johnson's letters, suspected, ii. 383, n. 2;
  Italian, an, on clean shirts, v. 60, n. 4;
  jelly, her, compared with Mrs. Abington's, ii. 349;
  Johnson's account of French sentiments and meat, ii. 385, n. 5;
    advice about the brewery, iii. 382, n. 1;
      about sweet-meats, iii. 186; iv. 90;
      on Mr. Thrale's death, iii. 136, n. 2;
    anxiety not to offend, iii. 54, n. 1;
    appeals to her love and pity, iv. 229, n. 3;
    appearances of friendship kept up with, iv. 164, 166;
    apprehensive of evil, v. 232, n. 5;
    asperses, i. 28;
      wishes to depreciate him, i. 66, n. 2;
    belief, fantastical account of, i. 68, n. 3;
    biographers, i. 26, n. 1;
    blames her conduct, iv. 277;
      his friendly animadversions, iii. 48;
    change in her feeling towards, iv. 340, n. 3;
    on children's books, iv. 8, n. 3;
    conversation too strong for the great, iv. 117;
    copyist, iv—37;
    dislike of extravagant praise, iii. 225;
      of singularity, ii. 74, n. 3;
    doubts her friendship, iv. 145, n. 2;
    dress, iii. 325;
    drives her from his mind, iv. 339, n. 3;
    and the Earl of Marchmont, iii. 344;
    her 'enchantment over,' v. 14;
    epigram, translates, i. 83, n. 3;
    flatters, ii. 332, n. 1, 349;
    flatters her, iii. 34;
    household, asks about, iii. 461-2;
    illness in 1766, i. 521;
    introduction to her, i. 520;
    <i>Journey into North Wales</i>, v. 427, n. 1;
    her kindness to, i. 520;
    laugh, ii. 262, n. 2;
    lectures, iv. 65, n. 1;
    Letters,
      publishes them for £500, i. 124, n. 4; ii. 43, n. 1;
      arranged inaccurately, i. 122, n. 2;
      error in date, iii. 453;
      possible alterations and interpolations, ii. 383, n. 2;
iii. 49, n. 1, 96, n. 1;
      read by Walpole, iv. 314;
      her own 'studied epistles,' iii. 421;
      his letters to her from Scotland, ii. 303, 305;
      about the Gordon Riots, iii. 428-30;
      her letters to him in Scotland, v. 84, n. 2
      (for other letters, See under JOHNSON, letters);
    love of her children, iv. 198, n. 4;
    'loved' by her and Boswell, ii. 427;
    mode of eating, i. 470, n. 2;
    and Mrs. Montagu, iv. 64, n. 1, 65, n. l;
    neglects, iv. 158-9;
      leaves him in sickness and solitude, iv. 249, n. 2;
      'one pleasant day since she left him,' iv. 436;
    nursed in her house, iv. 141, 181;
    <i>Ode</i> to her, v. 157-8;
    parody on Burke, iv. 317;
    pleasure in her society, i. 493-6;
    severe to her, iv. 159, n. 3;
    stuns her, v. 288;
    style, iii. 19, n. 2;
    supposed wish to marry her, iv. 387, n. 1;
    takes leave of her in April, 1783, iv. 198, n. 4;
    talk, iv. 237, n. 1;
    tenderness to her mother, ii. 263, n. 6;
    urges economy, iv. 85, n. 2;
    wishes for her and Mr. Thrale in the Hebrides, iii. 455;
    would not toast her in whisky, v. 347;
    'yoke' put upon her, iv. 340;
  Lennox, Mrs., liked by nobody, iv. 275, n. 2;
  Lichfield, visits, v. 428, nn. 1 and 3;
  Long, Dudley, praises, iv. 81;
  Lyttelton's vision, iv. 298, n. 3;
  Malone's criticism on her <i>Anecdotes</i>, iv. 341;
  marriage, second, alluded to by Boswell, ii. 328;
    signs that it was coming on, iv. 158, n. 4;
    takes place, iv. 339;
  marrying inferiors in rank, ii. 328;
  middle class abroad, absence of a happy, ii. 402, n. 1;
  Montagu, Mrs., praises, iv. 275, n. 3;
  mother, death of her, ii. 263;
  Musgrave, Mr., ii. 343, n. 2; iv. 323, n. 1;
  'My Mistress,' or 'Madam,' i. 494;
  <i>officious</i>, iv. 137, n. 2;
  Paris, contradictions in, iii. 352, n. 2;
  <i>Piozzi Letters</i>:
    See above under MRS. THRALE, <i>Johnson's Letters</i>;
  Pope's <i>Universal Prayer</i>, iii. 346-7;
  portrait, iv. 158, n. 1;
  praise, blasts by, iv. 82;
  Presto, the dog, iv. 347;
  Prior's love verses, praises, ii. 78;
  purse, uneasiness at losing her, v. 442;
  <i>regale</i>, v. 347, n. 1;
  Richardson's love of praise, v. 396, n. 1;
  'severe and knowing,' iii. 318, n. 3;
  Siddons, Mrs., as Euphrasia, v. 103, n. 1;
  son, loses her only surviving, ii. 468, 470; iii. 6, 45, n. 2;
    Johnson's advice to her, iii, 136, n. 2;
  son, loses her younger, iii. 4, n. 3;
  Thrale family, describes the rise of the, i. 491, n. 1;
  Thrale's death, iv. 84;
    effect on her and Johnson, v. 157;
    describes his manners, i. 494, n. 1;
    jealous of him, iii. 96, n. 1;
  <i>Three Warnings</i>, ii. 26;
  tongue, could not restrain her, iv. 82;
  truth, indifference to: See above under inaccuracy;
  Wales, estate in it, ii. 281;
    tour there, ii. 285; v. 427-60;
  wit, iv. 103, n. 1;
  Young's, Dr., ignorance of rhopalick verses, v. 269, n. 3;
  mentioned, ii. 142, 364, n. 3, 379; i11. 29, 33, 95, 126, 132,
248, 372; iv. 5, n. 1, 75, 80, 169, 242; v. 110.
THRALE, Miss,
  Baretti's <i>Dialogues</i> written for her, ii. 449, n. 2;
  Bath, at, in 1780, iii. 422;
  birth-day party, iii. 157, n. 3;
  harpsichord, playing on the, ii. 409;
  Johnson teaches her Latin, iv. 345, n. 2; v. 451, n. 2;
    is visited by her in his last illness, iv. 339, n. 3;
  Marie Antoinette, seen by, ii. 385;
  marries Admiral Lord Keith, v. 427, n. 1;
  mother, unfriendly with her, v. 427, n. 1;
  portrait, iv. 158, n. 1;
  Queeny, iii. 422, n. 4; v. 451, n. 2;
  mentioned, iii. 6; iv. 86, n. 2.
THRALE, Miss Sophia,
  Johnson advises her to study arithmetic, iv. 171, n. 3.
<i>Three Warnings, The</i>, ii. 26.
THRESHING, v. 263.
THROCKMORTON, Mr., of Weston Underwood, v. 439, n. 1.
THRONE, The, something behind it greater than it, iii. 416, n. 2.
THUANUS (De Thou),
  Johnson thinks of translating his History, iv. 410;
  mentioned, i. 32, 208, n. 1.
THUCYDIDES, his quotations from Homer, iii. 331.
THURLOW, first Lord,
  Boswell bows the intellectual knee to him, iv. 179, n. 2;
    <i>Journal of a Tour</i>, praises, i. 3, n. 1;
    writes to him, iv. 327;
    his answer, iv. 336;
  character by Sir W. Jones, iv. 349, n. 3;
  copyright, speech on, ii. 247, n. 5, 345;
  Cowper, treatment of, iv. 349, n. 3;
  duel with Andrew Stuart, ii. 230, n. 1;
  Horne Tooke, encounter with, iv. 327, n. 4;
    prosecutes him, iii. 354, n. 3;
  Horsley, rewards, iv. 438;
  Johnson's companion, iii. 22;
    generous offer to, iv. 348;
    letter to, iii. 441; v. 364, n. 1;
      letter from him, iv. 349;
    pension, proposed addition to, iv. 327-8, 348-350, 367-8;
    would prepare himself to meet him, iv. 327;
  legal opinion on Rev. J. Thomson's case, iii. 63;
  Macbean and the Charterhouse, i. 187;
  Prince of Wales and Sir John Ladd, iv. 412, n. 1;
  'puts his mind to yours,' iv. 179;
  Reynolds, letter to, iv. 350, n. 1;
  Royal Marriage Bill, ii. 152, n. 2;
  small certainties, ii. 323, n. 1;
  Taylor's, Dr., lawsuit, iii. 44;
  mentioned, iv. 310.
THUROT, M., iv. 101.
TIBER, iii. 251.
TIBULLUS,
  Grainger's translation, ii. 454;
  quoted, iv. 407, n. 1.
TICHBORNE TRIAL, v. 247, n. 2.
TICKELL, Richard,
  <i>Epistle from the Hon. Charles Fox</i>, ii. 292, n. 4; iii. 388, n. 3;
  <i>The Project</i>, iii. 318, n. 2.
TICKELL, Thomas,
  aided Blackmore in his <i>Creation</i>, ii. 108;
  <i>Life</i> by Johnson, iv. 56.
TIGER, River, v. 242, n. 1.
TILLEMONT, Gibbon praises his accuracy, i. 7, n. 1.
TILLOTSON, John, Archbishop of Canterbury,
  <i>Sermons</i>, iii. 247;
  on transubstantiation, v. 71.
TIME AND SPACE, iv. 25.
<i>Times, The</i>, quoted, v. 400, n. 4.
TIMIDITY, iv. 200, n. 4.
TIMMINS, Mr. Samuel,
  <i>Dr. Johnson in Birmingham</i> quoted, i. 85, n. 3, 95, n. 3.
TINDAL, Dr., ii. 229, n. 1.
TIPPOO, iii. 356, n. 2.
<i>Titi, Prince</i>, ii. 391.
TOASTS, iv. 29.
TOLAND, John, i. 29.
TOLCHER, Old Mr., i. 152, n. 3.
TOLERATION, ii. 249-254; iv. 12, 216;
  universal, iii. 380.
TOMASI, Signora, ii. 451, n. 3.
<i>To Miss—</i>, i. 178.
<i>To Miss—on her giving the Authour a Purse</i>, ii. 25.
<i>Tommy Prudent</i>, iv. 8, n. 3.
TONSON, Jacob,
  Budgell's <i>Epilogue</i>, iii. 46;
  Dryden's engagement with him, i. 193, n. 1.
TONSON, Jacob, the younger,
  Johnson praises him, i. 227, n. 3;
  mentioned, i. 263, n. 3.
TOOKE, Horne (at first Rev. John Horne),
  Beckford's speech to the King, iii. 201, n. 3;
  Boswell, altercation with, iii. 354, n. 2;
  <i>Diversions of Purley</i>, iii. 354, n. 2;
  imprisonment, iii. 314, n. 6;
    writ of error, iii. 345, n. 3;
  Johnson's etymologies, criticises, iii. 354;
    reads the preface to his <i>Dictionary</i> with tears, i. 297, n. 2;
iii. 354, n. 1;
  <i>Letter to Mr. Dunning</i>, iii. 354;
  living, resigns his, iii. 201, n. 3;
  Norton, Sir Fletcher, attacks, ii. 472, n. 2;
  pillory, should have been set in the, iii. 314;
    too much literature for it, iii. 354;
    Lord Mansfield durst not venture it, ib., n. 3;
  Thurlow, encounter with, iv. 327, n. 4.
TOPHAM, Edward, proprietor of <i>The World</i>, iii. 16, n. 1.
TOPLADY, Rev. Mr.,
  attacked by Wesley, v. 35, n. 3;
  meets Johnson at Dilly's, ii. 247, 253, 255.
TOPOGRAPHICAL WORKS, iii. 164, n. 1.
TOPPING, Mr., of Christ Church, iii. 449.
TOPSELL, Edward, i. 138, n. 5.
TORIES,
  defined, i. 294; iii. 174, n. 3;
  generated, how, iii. 326;
  hostile to Spain, i. 147, n. 5;
  identified with Jacobites, i. 429, n. 4;
  <i>Of Tory and Whig</i>, iv. 117;
  opposition to the Court, ii. 112;
  reverence for government, iv. l00;
  Whigs, enmity with, iv. 291;
  Whigs when out of place, i. 129.
TORRÉ, M., fire-work maker, iv. 324.
TORTURE, i. 466, 467, n. 1.
TOTTENHAM, iii. 45, n. 1.
TOUCH, sense of, ii. 190.
TOUR OF EUROPE, iii. 458.
TOWERS, Dr. J.,
  <i>Essay on the Life of Johnson</i>, iv. 41, n. 1;
  Johnson's <i>Life of Milton</i>, praises, iv. 40;
  <i>Letter to Dr. Johnson, &amp;c</i>., ii. 316.
TOWNLEY, C., an engraver, iv. 421, n. 2.
TOWNLEY, Charles, iii. 118, n. 3.
TOWNMALLING, iii. 452.
TOWNSEND, Alderman,
  Johnson attacks him, ii. 135, n. 1;
  Lord Mayor, iii. 459; iv. 175, n. 1;
  refuses to pay the land-tax, iii. 460;
  mentioned, iii. 201, n. 3.
TOWNSHEND, second Viscount, ii. 342, n. 1; v. 357, n. 1.
TOWNSHEND, fourth Viscount (afterwards first Marquis), i. 437, n. 2.
TOWNSHEND, Right Hon. Charles,
  Akenside, friendship with, iii. 3;
  'Champagne Speech,' ii. 222, n. 3;
  jokes and wit, ii. 222; ib., n. 3;
  Kames, Lord, criticises, ii. 90, n. 1.
TOWNSHEND, Hon. John, Tickell's <i>Epistle</i>, ii. 292, n. 4.
TOWNSHEND, Right Hon. Thomas (afterwards first Viscount Sydney),
  Goldsmith's 'Tommy Townshend,' iii. 233, n. 1;
  attacks Johnson, iv. 318;
  moves that Nowell's sermon be burnt, iv. 296, n. 1.
TOWNSON, Rev. Dr., ii. 258, n. 3; iv. 300, n. 2.
TRADE,
  difficulty, has not much, iii. 382, n. 2;
  gaming, like, v. 232;
  injury done to the body, ii. 218;
  leisure of those engaged, v. 59;
  military spirit injured by it, ii. 218;
  opportunity of rising in the world, ii. 98;
  produces no capital accession of wealth, ii. 98;
  but intermediate good, ii. 176;
  profit in pleasure, ii. 98;
  rapid rise of traders, i. 490;
  writers on it, ii. 430.
<i>Trade, The</i> (the booksellers of London), i. 438; ii. 345; iii. 285.
TRADESMEN,
  Chatham's description of the honest tradesman, v. 327, n. 4;
  excite anger by their opulence, v. 327;
  fires in the parlour, v. 6;
  funeral-sermon for a tradesman's daughter, ii. 122;
  retired from business, ii. 120;
    one attacked  by the stone, iii. 176, n. 1;
  wives, their, iii. 353.
TRADITION, untrustworthy, v. 224; of the Church, v. 71.
TRAGEDIANS, ridiculed in <i>The Idler</i>, v. 38, n. 1.
TRAGEDY,
  a ludicrous one, iii. 238;
  passions purged by it, iii. 39;
  worse for being acted, ii. 92, n. 4; v. 38:
  See PLAYERS.
TRANSLATIONS,
  how to judge of their merit, iii. 256;
  Sir John Hill's contract for one, ii. 39; n. 2;
  what books can and what cannot be translated, iii. 36, 257.
<i>Transpire</i>, iii. 343.
TRANSPORT, Rational, iii. 338.
TRANSUBSTANTIATION, v. 71, 88.
TRANSYLVANIA, ii. 7, n. 3.
TRAPAUD, General Cyrus, v. 135.
TRAPAUD, Governor, v. 134, 142.
TRAPP, Dr. i. 140, n. 5; iv. 381, n. 1.
TRAVELLERS,
  ancient, guessed; modern travellers measure, iii. 356;
  mean to tell the truth, iii. 235;
  modern mostly laughed at, iii. 300;
  strange turn to be displeased, iii. 236;
  unsatisfactory unless trustworthy, ii. 333.
TRAVELLING,
  advice about it, i. 431;
  Cowper, Gibbon, Goldsmith and Locke on the age for travelling,
iii. 458-9;
  human life great object of remark, iii. 301, n. 2;
  idle habits broken off, i. 409;
  Johnson's love of it, iii. 449-459;
  <i>Rasselas</i>, described in, i. 340, n. 1;
  rates of travelling
    London to St. Andrews, i. 359, n. 3;
    to Edinburgh, v. 21, n. 1;
    to Harwich, i. 466, n. 2;
    to Lichfield, i. 340, n. 1; ii. 45; iii. 411;
    to Milan, i. 370, n. 4;
    to Salisbury, iv. 234, n. 3;
  supplies little to the conversation, iii. 352;
  time ill spent on it in early manhood, iii. 352, 458.
TRAVELS, books of,
  writers very defective, ii. 377;
  should start with full minds, iii. 301;
  writing under a feigned character, iv. 320.
TREASON, constructive, iv. 87.
<i>Treatise on Painting</i>, i. 128, n. 2.
TRECOTHICK, Alderman,
  account of him, iii. 76, n. 2;
  his English, iii. 76, 201;
  Lord Mayor, iii. 459.
TREE, given a jerk by Divines, iv. 226.
TREES, their propagation, ii. 168. See under SCOTLAND, trees.
TRENTHAM, i. 36, n. 2.
TREVELYAN, Sir G. O.,
  Johnson and the Rev. John Macaulay, v. 360. n. 1;
  Rev. Kenneth Macaulay's <i>History of St. Kilda</i>, v. 119, n. 3.
TRIAL BY DUEL, v. 24.
TRICKS, either knavish or childish, iii. 396.
TRIFLES,
  life composed of them, i. 433, n. 4; ii. 359, n. 2;
  contentment with them, iii. 241-2;
  their importance, i. 317; iii. 355.
TRIMLESTOWN, Lord, iii. 227-8.
TRINITY, doctrine of the, ii. 254-5; v. 88.
<i>Tristram Shandy</i>. See STERNE.
TRONCHIN, M., iii. 301, n. 1.
TROTTER, Beatrix, iii. 359.
TROTTER, ——, an engraver, iv. 421, n. 2.
TROTZ, Professor, i. 475.
TROUGHTON, Lieutenant, a loquacious wanderer, v. 448.
TRUTH,
  children to be strictly trained in it, iii. 228;
  comfort of life, essential to the, iv. 305;
  consolation drawn from it, i. 339;
  contests concerning moral truth, iii. 17;
  deviations from it very frequent, iii. 403-4;
  human experience its test, i. 454;
  'I'd tell truth and shame the devil,' ii. 222;
  moral and physical, iv. 6;
  'not at home,' i. 436;
  obligatory, how far, iii. 320, 377; iv. 305-6;
  painful to be forced to defend it, iii. 11;
  perpetual vigilance needed, iii. 230; iv. 361;
  publishing it against oneself, iv. 396; v. 211;
  religious truth established by martyrdom, ii. 250;
  rights to utter it and knock down for uttering it, iv. 12;
  sick, should be told to the, iv. 306;
  society held together by it, iii. 293;
  story, essential to a, ii. 433:
  See under JOHNSON, truthfulness.
TUAM, Archbishop of, ii. 265, n. 4; iv. 198, n. 2.
TULL, Jethro, v. 324.
TUNBRIDGE SCHOOL, iv. 330.
TUNBRIDGE WELLS,
  Mrs. Montagu writes from it in 1760, ii. 64. n. 2;
  print of the company there in 1748, i. 190, n. 1;
  mentioned, iii. 45, n. 1.
TURGOT, existence of matter, i. 471, n. 2.
TURKEY and the Turks,
  Boswell wishes to visit it, iv. 199;
  opium in common use, iv. 171;
  sweep Greece, ii. 194;
  want of <i>Stirpes</i>, ii. 421;
  mentioned, v. 74.
TURKISH LADY, a, i. 343.
<i>Turkish Spy</i>, iv. 199; v. 341.
TURNER, John, a fencing-master, v. 103, n, 2.
TURNPIKES, v. 56, n. 2.
TURSELLINUS, i. 77.
TURTON, Dr., iii. 164.
TWALMLEY THE GREAT, iv. 193.
TWELLS, Leonard, <i>Life of Dr. E. Pocock</i>, iv. 185.
TWICKENHAM,
  Boswell and Johnson's drive to it, ii. 361-4;
  Cambridge's, Mr., villa, ii. 361;
  highwaymen, iii. 239, n. 1;
  society, ii. 120.
TWINING, Rev. Thomas, <i>Recreations and Studies of a Country Clergyman</i>,
  Johnson's dislike of 'the former, the latter,' iv. 190, n. 2;
    funeral, iv. 420, n. 1;
  the old willow-tree at Lichfield, iv. 372, n. 1.
TWISS, Richard, <i>Travels</i>, ii. 345.
TYBURN,
  executions there abolished, iv. 188;
  procession to it, iv. 189, n. 1;
  'Tyburn's elegiac lines,' ib.:
  See EXECUTIONS.
TYERS, Jonathan, iii. 308.
TYERS, Thomas,
  account of him, iii. 308-9;
  <i>Biographical Sketch of Dr. Johnson</i>, iii. 308; v. 73, n. 2;
  Johnson like a ghost: See JOHNSON, Ghost;
    rapid composition, i. 192, n. 1;
    talked as if on oath, ii. 434, n. 2;
    wish to visit India and Poland, iii. 456;
  Tom Restless of <i>The Idler</i>, iii. 308, n. 3;
  mentioned, ii. 107.
TYRANNY, remedy against it, ii. 170.
TYRAWLEY, Lord,
  account of him, ii. 211, n. 4;
  Chesterfield's saying, ii. 211.
TYRCONNEL, Lord,
  Savage's letter to him, i. 161, n. 3;
    patronised by him, i. 173, 372, n. 1.
TYRWHITT, Thomas, Chatterton's poems, iii. 50, n. 5; iv. 141, n. 1.
TYTLER, A. F. (son of W. Tytler, afterwards Lord Woodhouselee),
  meets Johnson, v. 387, n. 4, 388, n. 2, 402.
TYTLER, William,
  <i>History of Mary Queen of Scots</i>, i. 354; v. 274, n. 2, 387;
  Johnson's <i>Journey</i>, praises, ii. 305-6;
  meets him, v. 394, 396.</p>

<h3>U.</h3>

<p>UDSON, Mr., ii. 398.
ULYSSES, i. 12.
UNCLUBABLE, i. 27, n. 2, 480, n. 1; iv. 254, n. 2.
UNDERSTANDING,
  <i>inverted</i>, iii. 379;
  man's superiority over woman, iii. 52;
  propagating it, ii. 109, n. 2;
  Reynolds's rule for judging it, iv. 316.
UNEASINESS, iv. 273.
UN-IDEA'D, 'A set of wretched unidea'd girls,' i. 251.
<i>Union, The</i>, i. 117, n. 1.
UNITARIANS, ii. 408, n. i; iv. 125, n. 2.
<i>Unius lacertae</i>, iii. 255.
<i>Universal Chronicle, or Weekly Gazette</i>, i. 330, 345, n. 1.
<i>Universal History</i>, iii. 443; iv. 311.
<i>Universal Visiter</i>, i. 178, n. 2, 306; ii. 345.
UNIVERSITY,
  conversation of a man taught at an English one, v. 370;
  English and Scotch compared, i. 63, n. 1; v. 85, n. 2;
  fellowships, value of, iii. 13;
  foreign professorships, iii. 14;
  Gibbon, attacked by, iii. 13, n. 3;
  rich, not too, as Adam Smith asserts, iii. 13;
  school where everything may be learnt, should be a, ii. 371;
  subscription to the Articles, ii. 151; v. 64;
  theory and practice, ii. 52; iii. 138:
  See under CAMBRIDGE and OXFORD, and
  under SCOTLAND, Aberdeen, Edinburgh, Glasgow, and St. Andrews.
<i>Unscottified</i>, ii. 242; v. 55, n. 1.
UNWINS, the, Cowper's friends, i. 522.
UPPER-OSSORY, Lord, iii. 230, n. 5.
UPSTARTS, getting into parliament, ii. 153, 339.
URBINO, v. 276.
URIE, Captain, v. 135.
URNS, iv. 421, n. 2; v. 453, n. 1.
<i>Ursa Major</i>. See JOHNSON, bear.
USHER, Archbishop,
  assists Lydiat, i. 194, n. 2;
  luminary of the Irish Church, ii. 132.
USHER, at a school, i. 84.
USURY, law against, iii. 26.
UTILITY, beauty not dependent on it, ii. 166; iv. 167.
<i>Utopia</i>, iii. 202, n. 3.
UTRECHT,
  Boswell a student there, i. 400, 473; ii. 9;
  William Pitt (Earl of Chatham), a student, ii. 177, n. 1.
UTTOXETER MARKET,
  Johnson does penance there, i. 56, n. 2; iv. 373;
  Michael Johnson's shop, i. 36, n. 3.
UZàS, Duke of, iii. 322, n. 3.</p>

<h3>V.</h3>

<p>VACANCIES, eagerness for, iii. 251.<br/>

VACHELL, William, iii. 83, n. 3.<br/>

VACUUM, i. 444, n. 2.<br/>

'VAGABOND, Mr.,' iii. 411, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Vagabondo, Il</i>, i. 202; iii. 411.<br/>

VAILS, ii. 78.<br/>

VALENCIA, ii. 195, n. 3; iii. 434.<br/>

VALETUDINARIANS, ii. 460;<br/>

  Johnson's disgust at them, iii. 1, 152.<br/>

VALLANCY, Colonel, iv. 272, 278.<br/>

VANBRUGH, Sir John,<br/>

  attempted to answer Jeremy Collier, iv. 286, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Provoked Husband</i>, ii. 48, n. 3; iv. 284, n. 2;<br/>

  Reynolds's tribute to him, iv. 55.<br/>

VANE, Anne, v. 49, n. 4.<br/>

VANE, Lady, v. 49, n. 4.<br/>

<i>Vanessa</i>, ii. 389, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>,<br/>

  account of it, i. 192-5;<br/>

    price paid for it, i. 193, n. 1;<br/>

    rapidly composed, i. 192; ii. 15;<br/>

    written mostly at Hampstead, i. 192;<br/>

  Boswell finds in it the means of happiness, iii. 122, n. 2;<br/>

  Byron's admiration of it, i. 193, n. 3;<br/>

  death, 'kind nature's signal of retreat,' ii. 106;<br/>

  De Quincey on the opening lines, i. 193, n. 3;<br/>

  Garrick's sarcasm on it, i. 194;<br/>

  Johnson reads it with tears, iv. 45, n. 3;<br/>

  misery, 'the doom of man,' iii. 198; v. 179;<br/>

  'Patron and the jail,' i. 264;<br/>

  <i>Rasselas</i>, resemblance to, i. 342;<br/>

  Scott's admiration of it, i. 193, n. 3; iv. 45, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>spreads</i> changed into <i>burns</i>, iii. 357-8;<br/>

  Vane and Sedley, v. 49;<br/>

  Wolsey, Cardinal, iii. 221, n. 4.<br/>

VANSITTART, Dr.,<br/>

  account of him, i. 348, n. 1; v. 460, n. 1;<br/>

  story of the flea and the lion, ii. 194, n. 2;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 192.<br/>

VASS, Lauchland, v. 131, 144.<br/>

VEAL, Mrs., her ghost, ii. 163.<br/>

VEALE, Thomas, iv. 77, n. 3.<br/>

VENICE,<br/>

  Beauclerk plundered there by a gambler, i. 381, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson wishes to visit it, iii. 19;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 362; v. 69, n. 3.<br/>

VENUS, of Apelles, iv. 104.<br/>

<i>Veracious</i>, iv. 39, n. 3.<br/>

VERACITY. See TRUTH.<br/>

<i>Verbiage</i> ii. 236; iii. 256.<br/>

<i>Verecundulus</i>, i. 68, n. 1.<br/>

VERNON'S Parish Clerk, v. 268, n. 1.<br/>

VERSAILLES, ii. 385, 395;<br/>

  theatre, ii. 395, n. 2.<br/>

VERSES, in a dead language, ii. 371;<br/>

  making them, ii. 15.<br/>

<i>Verses on Ireland</i>, iii. 319.<br/>

<i>Verses on a Sprig of Myrtle</i>, i. 92.<br/>

<i>Verses to Mr. Richardson on his Sir Charles Grandison</i>, ii. 26.<br/>

VERTOT, ii. 237; iv. 311.<br/>

VESEY, Right Hon. Agmondesham,<br/>

  gentle manners, his, iv. 28;<br/>

  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479; ii. 318;<br/>

  professor in the imaginary college, v. 108.<br/>

VESEY, Mrs.,<br/>

  evenings at her house described by Langton, iii. 424; iv. 1, n. 1;<br/>

    by Hannah More, iii. 424, n. 3;<br/>

    by Horace Walpole, iii. 425, n. 3;<br/>

    by Miss Burney, iii. 426, n. 3;<br/>

    by Johnson, ib., n. 4;<br/>

  wishes to introduce Johnson to Raynal, iv. 435.<br/>

VESTRIS, the dancer, iv. 79.<br/>

<i>Vexing Thoughts</i>, iii. 5.<br/>

<i>Vicar of Wakefield</i>. See GOLDSMITH.<br/>

VICE,<br/>

  character not hurt by it, iii. 349;<br/>

  compared with virtue, iii. 342;<br/>

  Mandeville's doctrine: See MANDEVILLE.<br/>

<i>Vicious Intromission</i>,<br/>

  Johnson's argument, ii. 196-201, 206; iii. 102; v. 48.<br/>

VICTOR, Benjamin, iv. 53.<br/>

VICTORIA, Queen, death-warrants, iii. 121, n. 1.<br/>

VIDA, i. 230, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Vidit et erubuit</i>, iii. 304.<br/>

VILETTE, Rev. Mr.,<br/>

  Dodd's dedication to him, iii. 167, n. 1;<br/>

  his virtues, iv. 329.<br/>

<i>Village, The</i>, a poem, iv. 121, n. 4, 175.<br/>

VILLIERS, Sir George, his ghost, iii. 351.<br/>

VINCENT, William, Dean of Westminster, i. 302, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Vindication of the Licensers of the Stage</i>, i. 140; ii, 60, n. 3.<br/>

VIRGIL,<br/>

  <i>Aeneid</i>,<br/>

    its story, iv. 218;<br/>

  Aeneas's treatment of Dido, iv. 196;<br/>

  Burke's ragged copy, iii. 193, n. 3;<br/>

  farming, love of, v. 78;<br/>

  Homer, compared with, iii. 193;<br/>

  Johnson reads him, ii. 288; iv. 218;<br/>

    juvenile translations, i. 51;<br/>

  <i>machinery</i>, his, iv. 16;<br/>

  Pope, less talked of than, iii. 332;<br/>

  printing-house, describes a, v. 311-12;<br/>

  Theocritus, compared with, iv. 2;<br/>

  quotations:<br/>

    <i>Eclogues</i> i. 5—i. 460;<br/>

    <i>Eclogues</i> i. 11—iii. 310, n. 4;<br/>

    <i>Eclogues</i> ii. 16—iii. 87, n. 3; 212, n. 2;<br/>

    <i>Eclogues</i> iii. 64—v. 291, n, 1;<br/>

    <i>Eclogues</i> iii. 111—v. 279, n. 3;<br/>

    <i>Eclogues</i> viii. 43—i. 261, n. 3;<br/>

    <i>Georgics</i> ii. 173—iv. 372, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Georgics</i> iii. 9—ii. 329, n. 3;<br/>

    <i>Georgics</i> iii. 66—ii. 129;<br/>

    <i>Georgics</i> iv. l32—iv. 173, n. 2;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> i. 3—v. 392, n. 4;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> i. l99—iv. 258, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> i. 2O2—v. 333, n. 3;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> i. 204—v. 392, n. 3;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> i. 378—iv. 193, n. 2;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> i. 460-iii. 162, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> ii. 5—iii. 64, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> ii. 6—ii. 262, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> ii. 49—iii. 108, n. 3;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> ii. l98—iii. 212, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> ii. 368—v. 50, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> ii. 544—i. 142;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> iii. 461—ii. 22;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> vi. 273—v. 311;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> vi. 4l7—v. 311, n. 4;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> vi. 660—iv. 193, n. 2;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> vi. 730—1. 66;<br/>

    <i>Aeneid</i> xii. 424—ii. 272, n. 1.<br/>

VIRTUE,<br/>

  how far followed by happiness, i. 389, n. 2;<br/>

  men naturally virtuous compared with those who overcome<br/>

inclinations, iv. 224;<br/>

  not natural to man, iii. 352;<br/>

  practised  for the sake of character, iii. 342, 349;<br/>

  scholastic, ii. 223;<br/>

  why preferable to vice, iii. 342.<br/>

<i>Virtue, an Ethick Epistle</i>, iii. 199, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Vision of Theodore the Hermit</i>, i. 192, 483, n. 2.<br/>

VIVACITY, an art, ii. 462.<br/>

VOLCANOES, strata of earth in them, ii. 467.<br/>

VOLGA, iv. 277.<br/>

VOLTAIRE,<br/>

  'Après tout, c'est un monde passable,' i. 344;<br/>

  attacks, on answers to, v. 274, n. 4;<br/>

  Boswell visits him, i. 434, 435, n. 2; ii. 5; iii. 301, n. 1; v. 14;<br/>

  Bouhours, ii. 90, n. 3;<br/>

  Byng, Admiral, i. 314;<br/>

  <i>Candide</i>, i. 342; iii. 356;<br/>

  'Cerbères de la littérature,' v. 311, n. 4;<br/>

  Charles XII's dress, ii. 475, n. 3;<br/>

  Derham, William, v. 323, n. 4;<br/>

  Des Maizeaux's <i>Life of Bayle</i>, i. 29, n, 1;<br/>

  Dubos, ii. 90, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Essai sur les Moeurs</i>, ii. 53, n. 2;<br/>

  fame, his, iii. 263, 332;<br/>

  forgotten ideas, the situation of, i. 435, n. 2;<br/>

  Frederick the Great, contest with, i. 434; v. 103, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Ganganelli's Letters</i>, iii. 286;<br/>

  Hay, Lord Charles, iii. 8, n. 3;<br/>

  Hénault, ii. 383, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>History of the War in 1741</i>, v. 272;<br/>

  <i>Histoire de Louis XIV</i>, v. 393;<br/>

  Holbach's <i>Système de la Nature</i>, v. 47, n. 4;<br/>

  Hume, his echo, ii. 53;<br/>

  insurrection of 1745-6, account of the, iii. 414;<br/>

  Johnson attacks him, i. 498, 499, n. 1;<br/>

    praises his knowledge, but attacks his honesty, i. 435, n. 2;<br/>

      his reply, i. 499;<br/>

    and Frederick the Great, i. 434;<br/>

  <i>Julia Mandeville</i>, reviews, ii. 402, n. 1;<br/>

  Kames, Lord, ii. 90, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Le désastre de Lisbonne</i>, iv. 302, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Le Monde comme il va</i>, i. 344, n. 2;<br/>

  Leroi, the watch-maker, ii. 391, n. 5;<br/>

  Lewis XIV, celebrated in many languages, i. 123;<br/>

    and Mlle. de la Vallière, v. 49, n. 3;<br/>

    loved a striking story, iii. 414;<br/>

  Macdonald, Sir James, v. 152, n. 1;<br/>

  Malagrida, iv. 174, n. 5;<br/>

  master of English oaths, i. 435, n. 1;<br/>

  Maupertuis's death, ii. 54, n. 3;<br/>

  middle class in England and France, ii. 402, n. 1;<br/>

  Montagu's, Mrs., <i>Essay</i>, ii. 88;<br/>

  Moréri, v. 311, n. 1;<br/>

  narrator, good, ii. 125;<br/>

  Newton, Leibnitz and Clarke, v. 287, n. 2;<br/>

  Pope and Dryden, distinguishes, ii. 5;<br/>

  Pope, visits, i. 499, n. 1;<br/>

  Pretender, reflections on the, v. 199-200;<br/>

  read less than formerly, iv. 288;<br/>

  Reynolds's allegorical picture, v. 273, n. 4;<br/>

  Rousseau, compared with, ii. 12;<br/>

  Shakespeare, attacks, i. 498; ii. 88, n. 3;<br/>

  made him known to the French, ii. 88, n. 2;<br/>

  Stuart, House of, v. 200;<br/>

  torture in France, i. 467, n. 1;<br/>

  trial, has not yet stood his, v. 311;<br/>

  <i>Universal History</i>, v. 311;<br/>

  <i>Vir est acerrimi ingenii et paucarum literarum</i>, ii. 406;<br/>

  Wesley calls him coxcomb and cynic, v. 378, n. 1;<br/>

  witchcraft, v. 46, n. 1;<br/>

  wonders, caught greedily at, i. 498, n. 4; iii. 229, n. 3.<br/>

Vossius, Isaac, i. 186, n. 2.<br/>

Voting, privilege of, ii. 340.<br/>

Vows, Cowley's lines on them, iii. 357, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson's warning against them, ii. 21;<br/>

  a snare for sin, iii. 357;<br/>

  if unnecessary a folly and a crime, iii. 357, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Vox Viva</i>, v. 324.<br/>

<i>Voyage to Lisbon</i>, i. 269, n. 1.<br/>

<i>Voyages to the South Sea</i>. See SOUTH SEA.<br/>

Vranyken, University of, i. 475.<br/>

Vulgar, The, children of the State, ii. 14; iv. 216.<br/>

Vyse, Rev. Dr., Boswell, letter to, iii. 125;<br/>

  Johnson's letter to him, iii. 125;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 372, n. 2.<br/>
</p>

<h3>W.</h3>

<p>Wade, General,<br/>

  calls <i>the</i> M'Farlane <i>Mr.</i> M'Farlane, v. 156, n. 3;<br/>

  his Hut, v. 134.<br/>

Wager, Charles, ii. 164, n. 5.<br/>

Wages, raising those of day-labourers wrong, iv. 176; v. 263;<br/>

  women-servants' less than men-servants', ii. 217.<br/>

Wake, Archbishop, ii. 342, n. 1.<br/>

Waldegrave, Lady, ii. 224, n. 1.<br/>

Wales, Abergeley, v. 446;<br/>

  Angle-sea, ii. 284; v. 447;<br/>

  Bâch y Graig (Bachycraigh), iii. 134, n. 1, 454; v. 436, 438;<br/>

  Bangor, ii. 284; v. 447, 448, 452;<br/>

  Beaumaris, v. 447-8;<br/>

  Bible in Welsh, v. 450, 454;<br/>

  Bodryddan, v. 442, n. 3;<br/>

  Bodville, v. 449-51;<br/>

  Boswell proposes a tour, iii. 134, 454;<br/>

  Brecon, iii. 139;<br/>

  Bryn o dol, v. 449;<br/>

  Caernarvon, v. 448, 451;<br/>

  castles, compared with Scotch, ii. 285; v. 374, n. 1;<br/>

    vast size, v. 437, 442, 448-9, 452;<br/>

  charitable establishment, iii. 255;<br/>

  Chirk Castle, v. 453;<br/>

  churches at Bodville neglected, v. 450;<br/>

  Clwyd, River, v. 438;<br/>

  Conway, v. 446, 452;<br/>

  Danes, settlement of, v. 130;<br/>

  Denbigh, ii. 282; v. 437-8, 453;<br/>

  Dymerchion, v. 438, 440;<br/>

  Elwy, River, v. 438;<br/>

  great families kept a kind of court, v. 276;<br/>

  Gwaynynog, iv. 421, n. 2; v. 440, n. 1, 443, 452-3;<br/>

  hiring of harvest-men, v. 453;<br/>

  Holywell, v. 440-2;<br/>

  inhospitality, v. 452;<br/>

  inns, v. 446-7;<br/>

  Johnson's tour to Wales, ii. 279, 281, 282, 284; v. 427:<br/>

    see <i>Journey into North Wales</i>;<br/>

  Kefnamwyellh, v. 452;<br/>

  literature, indifference to, v. 443;<br/>

  Llanerk, v. 450;<br/>

  Llangwinodyl, v. 449, 451;<br/>

  Llannerch, v. 439;<br/>

  Llanrhaiadr, v. 453;<br/>

  Lleweney Hall, Johnson visits it, ii. 282; v. 435-46;<br/>

    description of it, v. 436;<br/>

    pales and gates brought from it, v. 433;<br/>

  Llyn Badarn, v. 451;<br/>

  Llyn Beris, v. 451;<br/>

  Maesmynnan, v. 445;<br/>

  manuscripts, ii. 383;<br/>

  Methodists, v. 451;<br/>

  Mold, v. 435;<br/>

  mutinous in 1779, iii. 408, n. 4;<br/>

  offers nothing for speculation, ii. 284;<br/>

  Oswestry, v. 454;<br/>

  parson's awe of Johnson, v. 450, n. 2;<br/>

  Penmaen Mawr, ii. 284; v. 447, 452;<br/>

  Penmaen Rhôs, v. 446, 452;<br/>

  Pwlheli, v. 451;<br/>

  <i>rivers</i>, v. 442, n. 4;<br/>

  Ruabon, v. 450, n, 2;<br/>

  Ruthin Castle, v. 442;<br/>

  second sight, ii. 150;<br/>

  Tydweilliog, v. 449, 451;<br/>

  Ustrad, River, v. 442, n. 4;<br/>

  Welsh language, how far related to Irish, i. 322;<br/>

    scheme for preserving it, v. 443;<br/>

    used in the Church services, v. 438, 440, 441, 446, 449, 450;<br/>

  Welshmen, generally have the spirit of gentlemen, iii. 275;<br/>

  Wrexham, ii. 240, w. 4; v. 453.<br/>

WALES, Prince of. See PRINCE OF WALES.<br/>

WALKER, John,<br/>

  'celebrated master of elocution,' iv. 206;<br/>

  dedication to Johnson, iv. 421, n. 2.<br/>

WALKER, Joseph Cooper, i. 321; iii. 111, n. 4.<br/>

WALKER, Thomas, the actor, ii. 368.<br/>

WALKING, habit of, i. 64, n. 4.<br/>

WALL, Dr., iv. 292.<br/>

WALL, cost of a garden wall, iv. 205.<br/>

WALL, <i>taking</i> the, i. 110; v. 230.<br/>

WALLACE, ——, a Scotch author of the first distinction, ii. 53, n. 1.<br/>

WALLER, Edmund,<br/>

  Amoret and Sacharissa, ii. 360;<br/>

  <i>Divine Poesie</i>, the communion of saints, iv. 290, n. 1;<br/>

  Dryden, studied by, iv. 38, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Epistle to a Lady</i>, v. 221, n. 1;<br/>

  grandson, a plain country gentleman, v. 86;<br/>

  great-grandson, at Aberdeen, v. 85;<br/>

  <i>Life</i> by Johnson, iv. 36, n. 4, 38, n. 2, 39;<br/>

  <i>Loving at first sight</i>, iv. 36;<br/>

  <i>Reflections on the Lord's Prayer</i>, iv. 290, n. 4;<br/>

  water-drinker, iii. 327, n. 2;<br/>

  women, praises of, ii. 57.<br/>

WALMSLEY, Gilbert,<br/>

  character by Johnson, i. 81; iii. 439;<br/>

  Colson, letter to, i. 102;<br/>

  debtor to Mrs. Johnson, i. 79, n. 2;<br/>

  Garrick, letter to, i. 176, n. 2;<br/>

    scholarship, ii. 377, n. 2;<br/>

  Greek, knowledge of, iv. 33, n. 3;<br/>

  house, ii. 467;<br/>

  Johnson and Garrick, recommends, i. 102;<br/>

  Johnson threatens to put <i>Irene</i> into the <i>Spiritual Court</i>, i. 101;<br/>

  Whig, a, i. 81, 430; iii. 439, n. 3; v. 386.<br/>

WALMSLEY, Mrs., i. 82-3.<br/>

WALPOLE, Horatio (afterwards first Baron Walpole), iii. 71, n. 4.<br/>

WALPOLE, Horace (afterwards fourth Earl of Orford),<br/>

  Adams the architects, ii. 325, n. 3;<br/>

  addresses to the King in 1784, iv. 265, n. 5;<br/>

  arbitrary power, courtiers in favour of, iii. 84, n. 1;<br/>

  arithmetician, a woeful, iii. 226, n. 4;<br/>

    Professor Sanderson and the multiplication table, ii. 190, n. 3;<br/>

  Astle, Thomas, i. 155, n. 2;<br/>

  atheism and bigotry first cousins, iv. 194, n. 1;<br/>

  Atterbury on Burnet's <i>History</i>, ii. 213, n. 3;<br/>

  balloons, iv. 356, n. 1;<br/>

  Barrington, Daines, iv. 437;<br/>

  Barry's <i>Analysis</i>, iv. 224, n. 1;<br/>

  Bate and the <i>Morning Post</i>, iv. 296, n. 3;<br/>

  Beauclerk's library, iv. 105, n. 2;<br/>

  Beckford's Bribery Bill, ii. 339, n. 2;<br/>

    speech to the King, iii. 201, n. 3;<br/>

    tyrannic character, iii. 76, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Biographia Britannica</i>, iii. 174, n. 3;<br/>

  Blagden on Boswell's <i>Life</i>, iv. 30, n. 2;<br/>

  Boccage, Mme. du, iv. 331, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>bonmots</i>, collection of, iii. 191, n. 2;<br/>

  Boswell calls on him, iv. 110, n. 3;<br/>

    <i>Corsica</i>, ii. 46, n. 1, 71, n. 2;<br/>

    <i>Life of Johnson</i>, iv. 314, n. 5;<br/>

    presence, silent in, ib.;<br/>

  Burke's wit, iv. 276, n. 2;<br/>

  Bute's, Lord, familiar friends, i. 386, n. 3;<br/>

    and the tenure of the judges, ii. 353, n. 3;<br/>

  Cameron's execution, i. 146, n. 2;<br/>

  Chambers's <i>Treatise on Architecture</i>, iv. 187, n. 4;<br/>

  Chatham's funeral, iv. 208, n. 1;<br/>

  Chatterton and Goldsmith, iii. 51, n. 2;<br/>

  Chesterfield as a patron, iv. 331, n. 1;<br/>

    wit, ii. 211, n. 3;<br/>

  Cibber, Colley, i. 401, n. 1; iii. 72, n. 4;<br/>

  City Address to the King in 1781, iv. 139, n. 4;<br/>

  City and Blackfriars Bridge, i. 351, n. 1;<br/>

  Clarke, Dr., and Queen Caroline, iii. 248, n. 2;<br/>

  Clive, Mrs., iii. 239, n. 1; iv. 243, n. 2;<br/>

  Cock Lane Ghost, i. 407, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Codrington, Life of Colonel</i>, iii. 204, n. 1;<br/>

  Cornwallis's capitulation, iii. 355, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Critical Review</i>, iii. 32, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Cross Readings</i>, iv. 322, n. 2;<br/>

  Cumberland, William, Duke of, cruelty of, ii. 375, n. 1;<br/>

  Cumberland's <i>Odes</i>, iii. 43, n. 3;<br/>

  Dalrymple, Sir John, ii. 210, n. 2;<br/>

  Dashwood, Sir F., ii. 135, n. 2;<br/>

  Devonshire, third Duke of, iii. 186, n. 4;<br/>

  Dodd's execution, iii. 120, n. 3;<br/>

    attempt to bribe the Chancellor, iii. 139, n. 3;<br/>

    sermon at the Magdalen House, iii. 139, n. 4;<br/>

  Dodsley, Robert, ii. 447, n. 2;<br/>

  Drummond's <i>Travels</i>, v. 323, n. 3;<br/>

  Dublin theatre riot, i. 386, n. 1;<br/>

  duelling, ii. 226, n. 5;<br/>

  Dundas, 'Starvation,' ii. 160, n. 1;<br/>

  Dunning's motion on the influence of the Crown, iv. 220, n. 5;<br/>

  Eton, revisits, iv. 127, n. 1;<br/>

  Fitzherbert's suicide, ii. 228, n. 3;<br/>

  Fitzpatrick, Richard, iii. 388, n. 3;<br/>

  freethinking, iii. 388, n. 3;<br/>

  French, affect philosophy and free-thinking, iii. 388, n. 3;<br/>

    gentleman's visit to London in 1764, iv. 92, n. 5;<br/>

    ladies, indelicacy of the talk of, ii. 403, n, 1; iii. 352, n. 2;<br/>

    meals, ii. 402, n. 2;<br/>

    middling and common people, ii. 402, n. 1;<br/>

    philosophy, iii. 305, n. 2;<br/>

    <i>savans</i>, iii. 254, n. 1;<br/>

    'talk gruel and anatomy,' iv. 15, n. 4;<br/>

  gaming-clubs, iii. 23, n. 1;<br/>

  Garrick's acting, iv. 243, n. 6;<br/>

    funeral, iv. 208, n. 1;<br/>

  George I and Miss Brett, i. 174, n. 2;<br/>

    burnt two wills, ii. 342, n. 1;<br/>

    his will burnt, ib.; iv. 107, n. 1;<br/>

  George II and <i>Alexander's Feast</i>, i. 209, n. 2;<br/>

    character, i. 147, n. 1;<br/>

    and the fast of Jan. 30, ii. 152, n. 1;<br/>

    and his father's will, ii. 342, n. 1; iv. 107, n. 1;<br/>

  George III aims at despotism, i. 116, n. 1;<br/>

    as commander-in-chief, iii. 365, n. 4;<br/>

    coronation, iii. 9, n. 2; v. 103, n. 1;<br/>

    and Sir John Dalrymple, ii. 210, n. 2;<br/>

    and the fast of Jan. 30, ii. 152, n. 1;<br/>

    and Johnson's <i>Journey</i>, ii. 290, n. 2;<br/>

    ministers his tools, iii. 408, n. 4;<br/>

      his own minister, i. 424, n. 1;<br/>

    mother and Lord Bute, iv. 127, n. 3;<br/>

    and the sea, i. 340, n. 1;<br/>

  George IV in his youth, ii. 33, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Leonidas</i> Glover, v. 116, n. 4;<br/>

  Goldsmith's envy, i. 413, n. 3;<br/>

    an 'inspired idiot,' i. 412, n. 6;<br/>

      'silly,' i. 388, n. 3;<br/>

    and Malagrida, iv. 175, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>She Stoops to Conquer</i>, ii. 208, n. 5;<br/>

  Gordon Riots, iii. 429, n. 3; v. 328, n. 2;<br/>

  Gower, Lord, i. 296, n. 1;<br/>

  Granger's patron, iii. 91;<br/>

  Gray, Sir James, ii. 177, n. 1;<br/>

  Grenville, George, ii. 135, n. 2;<br/>

  Gunning, the Misses, v. 359, n. 2;<br/>

  Hagley Park, v. 78, n. 3, 456, n. 1;<br/>

  Hamilton, W. G., i. 520;<br/>

  <i>Heroic Epistle</i> ascribed to him, iv. 315;<br/>

  Highland regiment in Jersey, v. 142, n. 2;<br/>

  highwaymen, iii. 239, n. 1;<br/>

  Hill, Sir John, ii. 38, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>History of the House of Yvery</i>, iv. 198, n. 3;<br/>

  Hollis, Thomas, iv. 97, n. 3;<br/>

  Hooke, Nathaniel, v. 175, n. 3;<br/>

  'Horry' Walpole, iv. 314;<br/>

  Hôtel du Chatelet, ii. 389, n. 2;<br/>

  Houghton Collection, sale of the, iv. 334, n. 6;<br/>

  House of Commons' contest with the City in 1771, ii. 300, n. 5;<br/>

  Hume, David, atheist and bigot, iv. 194, n. 1;<br/>

    conversation, ii. 236, n. 1;<br/>

    French, i. 439, n. 2;<br/>

  Hurd, Bishop, iv. 190, n. 1;<br/>

  Irish peers, creation of, iii. 407, n. 4;<br/>

  Italy, tour to, iii. 31, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Jealous Wife, The</i>, i. 364, n. 1;<br/>

  Jenkinson,  Charles (first Earl of Liverpool), iii. 146, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson and Barnard's verses, iv. 433;<br/>

    'Billingsgate on Milton,' iv. 40, n. 1;<br/>

    bombast, i. 388, n. 3;<br/>

    character, ignorant of, iv. 433;<br/>

    <i>Debates</i>, i. 505;<br/>

    described by, iv. 314;<br/>

    history reduced to four lines, i. 5, n. 1;<br/>

    at Lady Lucan's, iii. 425, n. 3;<br/>

    monument, iv. 423, n. 1;<br/>

    'not a true admirer' of, iv. 314;<br/>

       attacks on him, ib., nn. 3 and 5;<br/>

    at the Royal Academy, iv. 314, n. 3;<br/>

    on sacrilege, v. 114, n. 2;<br/>

    writing for money, iii. 19, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson the horse-rider, i. 399;<br/>

  <i>Junius</i>, authorship of, iii. 376, n. 4;<br/>

  Keppel's Court-martial, iv. 12, n. 6;<br/>

  Kinnoul, Lord, ii. 211, n. 4;<br/>

  libels in 1770, i. 116, n. 1;<br/>

  Lort, Rev. Dr., iv. 290, n. 4;<br/>

  Lovat's execution, i. 181, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Love and Madness</i>, iv. 187, n. 1;<br/>

  Lucan's, Lady, bluestocking meeting, iii. 425, n. 3;<br/>

  Lyttelton, first Lord, i. 267, n. 2;<br/>

  Lyttelton, second Lord, iv. 298, n. 3;<br/>

  Maccaroni Club, v. 84, n, 1;<br/>

  Macclesfield, Earl of, i. 267, n. 1;<br/>

  Macdonald, Sir J., i. 449, n. 2;<br/>

  Mackintosh's criticism of his style, iii. 31, n. 1;<br/>

  Macpherson and the newspapers, ii. 307, n. 4;<br/>

  Mac Swinny (old Swinney), iii. 71, n. 4;<br/>

  Mansfield's, Lord, attacks on the press, i. 116, n. 1;<br/>

    severity, iii. 120, n. 3;<br/>

  Mason's <i>Memoirs of Gray</i>, i. 29, n. 3;<br/>

  Mead, Dr., iii. 355, n. 2;<br/>

  Methodists expelled from Oxford, ii. 187, n. 1;<br/>

  militia in 1778, iii. 360, n, 3, 365, n. 4;<br/>

  Millar, Andrew, i. 287, n. 3;<br/>

  Miller, Lady, ii. 336, n. 5;<br/>

  Miller, Philip, v. 78, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Miss</i>, a, v. 185, n. 1;<br/>

  Montagu, Mrs., at the Academy, ii. 88, n. 3;<br/>

    at Lady Lucan's, iii. 425, n. 3;<br/>

  Morell, Dr., v. 350, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Motion, The</i>, a caricature, v. 285, n. 1;<br/>

  'mystery, the wisdom of blockheads,' iii. 324, n. 4;<br/>

  Nichols's <i>Life of Bowyer</i>, iv. 437;<br/>

  North, Lord, and Mr. Macdonald, v. 153, n. 1;<br/>

  Northumberland, Duchess of, ii. 337, n. 1;<br/>

  Northumberland, Earl of, ii. 132, n. 1;<br/>

  Norton, Sir Fletcher, ii. 472, n. 2;<br/>

  Oglethorpe, General, i. 128, n. 1;<br/>

  Orford, Earl of, becomes, iii. 191, n. 2;<br/>

  Otaheitans, The, v. 328, n. 1;<br/>

  Pantheon in Oxford Street, ii. 169, n. 1;<br/>

  pantomimes, i. 111, n. 2;<br/>

  Paoli, ii. 71, n. 2, 82, n. 1; v. 1, n. 3;<br/>

  Paris, ii. 403, n. 1; iii. 352, n. 2;<br/>

  Patagonia, Giants of, v. 387, n. 6;<br/>

  peerages, new, iv. 249, n. 4;<br/>

  Pelham's death, i. 269, n. 1;<br/>

  Pembroke, tenth Earl of, ii. 371, n. 3;<br/>

  petitions to the king against the House of Commons, ii. 90, n. 5;<br/>

  Philipps, Sir John and Lady, v. 276, n. 2;<br/>

  press prosecutions, ii. 60, n. 3;<br/>

  prize-fighting, v. 229, n. 2;<br/>

  public affairs in 1779, iii. 408, n. 4;<br/>

  Richardson's novels, ii. 174, n. 2;<br/>

  Royal Academy dinner, iii. 51, n. 2;<br/>

  Royal Marriage Bill, ii. 152, n. 2;<br/>

  Savage, Richard, i. 170, n. 5;<br/>

  Scotch and the Gordon Riots, ii. 300, n. 5;<br/>

    and the House of Commons, ii. 300, n. 5;<br/>

    officers of militia, iii. 399, n. 2;<br/>

    recruiting in London, iii. 399, n. 3;<br/>

  Scotland engendering traitors, iii. 430, n. 6;<br/>

  Seeker, Archbishop, iv. 29, n. 1;<br/>

  Shebbeare, Dr., broken Jacobite physician, iv. 113, n. 1;<br/>

    pension, ii. 112, n. 3;<br/>

    trial for libelling dead kings, iii. 15, n, 3;<br/>

  sinecure office, iii. 19, n. 3;<br/>

  slavery, iii. 200, n. 4, 204, n. 1;<br/>

  Smollett's abuse of Lord Lyttelton, iii. 33, n. 1;<br/>

    <i>Humphry Clinker</i>, i. 351, n. 1;<br/>

  Southwark election of 1774, ii. 287, n. 2;<br/>

  speeches in parliament, effect of, iii. 233, n. 1;<br/>

  Strawberry, v. 456, n. 2;<br/>

  tea, universal use of, i. 313, n. 2;<br/>

  Thurot's descent on Ireland, iv. 101, n. 4;<br/>

  title, succeeds to the, iv. 314, n. 1;<br/>

  Townshend, Charles, ii. 222, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>transpire</i>, iii. 343, n. 2;<br/>

  Trecothick, Alderman, iii. 76, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Tristram Shandy</i>, ii. 449, n. 3;<br/>

  Tyrawley, Lord, ii. 211, n. 4;<br/>

  Usher of the Exchequer, iii. 19, n. 3;<br/>

  vails, ii. 78, n. 1;<br/>

  Vesey's, Mrs., <i>Babels</i>, iii. 425, n. 3;<br/>

  Voltaire, letter from, ii. 88, n. 2;<br/>

  Walpole's, Sir R., great plan of honesty, i. 131, n. 1;<br/>

    low opinion of history, ii. 79, n. 3;<br/>

  Warburton and Helvetius, iv. 261, n. 3;<br/>

  Westmoreland, Earl of, at Oxford, i. 281, n. 1;<br/>

  Whigs and Tories, iv. 117, n. 5;<br/>

  Whitaker's <i>Manchester</i>, iii 333, n. 3;<br/>

  Whitehead, Paul, i. 125, n. 1;<br/>

  Whitehead, William, i. 401, n. 1;<br/>

  Willes, Chief Justice, iv. 103, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>World, The</i>, contributor to, i. 257, n. 3;<br/>

  Yonge, Sir William, i. 197, n. 4;<br/>

  Young, Dr., v. 269, n. 2;<br/>

  Young, Professor, parody of Johnson, iv. 392, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Zobeide</i>, iii. 38, n. 5.<br/>

WALPOLE, Sir Robert,<br/>

  banished to the House of Lords, i. 510;<br/>

  Bath, Lord, sarcastic speech to, v. 339, n. 1;<br/>

  Clarke's refusal of a bishopric, iii. 248, n. 2;<br/>

  debates, reports of, unfair, i. 502; iv. 314;<br/>

  Elwall's challenge, ii. 164, n. 5;<br/>

  ferment against him, i. 129, 131; ii. 348, n. 2;<br/>

  fixed star, a, i. 131; v. 339;<br/>

  'happier hour, his,' iii. 57, n. 2; iv. 364, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Hosier's Ghost</i>, v. 116, n. 4;<br/>

  indecent pamphlet against him, iii. 239;<br/>

  Johnson attacks him in <i>London</i>, i. 129;<br/>

    in <i>Marmor Norfolciense</i>, i. 141;<br/>

    inveighs against him, i. 164;<br/>

  learned, neglected the, v. 59, n. 1;<br/>

  levee, his bow at a, iii. 90;<br/>

  ministry stable and grateful, ii. 348;<br/>

  patriots, iv. 87, n. 2;<br/>

  peace-minister, i. 131; v. 339, n. 3;<br/>

  Pitt, distinguished from, ii. 195;<br/>

  Pope's pride in him, iii. 347, n. 2;<br/>

  prime-minister, a real, ii. 355; iv. 81;<br/>

  'read, I cannot,' ii. 337, n. 4;<br/>

  read Sydenham, v. 93, n. 4;<br/>

  talked bawdy at his table, iii. 57;<br/>

  Tories and Jacobites, confounded, i. 429, n. 4;<br/>

  'Walelop' and 'Right Hon. M. Tullius Cicero,' i. 502;<br/>

  Whiggism under him, ii. 117;<br/>

  Yonge, Sir W., character of, i. 197, n. 4;<br/>

  mentioned, v. 285, n. 1.<br/>

WALSALL, i. 86, n. 2.<br/>

WALSH, William,<br/>

  'knowing,' i. 251, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Retirement</i>, ii. 133, n. 1.<br/>

WALSINGHAM, Admiral, iii. 21, n. 2.<br/>

WALTON, Isaac, <i>Complete Angler</i>, iv. 311;<br/>

  Donne's vision, ii. 445;<br/>

  <i>Lives</i>, his, one of Johnson's favourite books, ii. 363;<br/>

    projected edition, ii. 279, 283-5, 445; iii. 107;<br/>

  low situation in life, ii. 364;<br/>

  a great panegyrist, ib.;<br/>

  quotes Topsell, i. 138, n. 5.<br/>

WANTS, fewness of, ii. 474, n. 3, 475.<br/>

WAR,<br/>

  encourages falsehoods, iii. 267, n. 1;<br/>

  Kames's opinion ridiculed, i. 393, n. 2;<br/>

  lawfulness, ii. 226;<br/>

  miseries of it, ii. 134;<br/>

  one side or other must prevail, iv. 200;<br/>

  talk of it, iii. 265.<br/>

WARBURTON, William, Bishop of Gloucester,<br/>

  abuse, extended his, v. 93;<br/>

  Allen's niece, married, ii. 37, n. 1; v. 80;<br/>

  Birch, Dr., letter to, i. 28;<br/>

  'blazes,' v. 81;<br/>

  Boswell imitates his manner, iii. 310, n. 4;<br/>

  Churchill attacks him, iv. 49, n. 1; v. 81, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Divine Legation</i>, i. 235, n. 3; iv. 48;<br/>

  quotations from it, v. 423;<br/>

  <i>Doctrine of Grace</i>, v. 93;<br/>

  'flounders well,' v. 93, n. 1;<br/>

  general knowledge, ii. 36;<br/>

  Helvetius, would have <i>worked</i>, iv. 261, n. 3;<br/>

  infidelity, prevalence of, ii. 359, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson's account of him, v. 80;<br/>

    and Chesterfield, i. 263;<br/>

    gratitude to him, i. 176;<br/>

    and he cannot bear each other's style, iv. 48;<br/>

    <i>Macbeth</i>, praises, i. 175;<br/>

    meets him, iv. 47, n. 2, 48;<br/>

    praises him, i. 263, n. 3; iv. 46-9;<br/>

    treats him with great respect, iv. 288;<br/>

  <i>lie</i>, use of the word, iv. 49;<br/>

  Lincoln's Inn preacher, ii. 37, n. 1;<br/>

  Lowth, controversy with, ii. 37; v. 125, 423;<br/>

  Mallet attacks him, i. 329;<br/>

    <i>Life of Bacon</i>, iii. 194;<br/>

    projected <i>Life of Marlborough</i>, iii. 194;<br/>

  metaphysics, ignorance of, v. 81, n. 1;<br/>

  Parr's <i>Tracts by Warburton, &amp;c.</i>, iv. 47, n. 2;<br/>

  Pope's <i>Essay on Man</i>, ii. 37, n. 1; iii. 402, n. 1; v. 80;<br/>

    made him a Bishop, ii. 37, n. 1; v. 80;<br/>

    want of genius, v. 92, n. 4<br/>

  reading, great and wide, ii. 36; iv. 48-9; v. 57, n. 3, 81;<br/>

  <i>Shakespeare</i>, edition of, i. 175, 176, 329; iv. 46; v. 244, n. 2;<br/>

    lines applicable to it, iv. 288;<br/>

  Strahan, intimate with, v. 92; ii. 34, n. 1;<br/>

  Theobald, compared with, i. 329;<br/>

    helped, v. 80;<br/>

  <i>To the most impudent Man alive</i>, i. 329;<br/>

  'vast sea of words,' i. 260, n. 1, 278;<br/>

  <i>View of Bolingbroke's Philosophy</i>, i. 330, n. 1;<br/>

  writes and speaks at random, v. 92;<br/>

  Wycherly's definition of wit, iii. 23, n. 3.<br/>

WARBURTON, Mrs., ii. 36, n. 2, 37, n. 1.<br/>

WARD, the quack doctor, iii. 389.<br/>

WARDLAW, Sir Henry, ii. 91, n. 2.<br/>

WARLEY CAMP, iii. 360-2, 365;<br/>

  visited by the King, ib., n. 3;<br/>

  by Paoli, iii. 368.<br/>

WARNER, Rebecca, <i>Original Letters</i>, iv. 34, n. 5.<br/>

WARNER, Rev. R., <i>Tour through the Northern Counties</i>, iv. 373, n. 1.<br/>

WARRANTS, general, ii. 72.<br/>

WARREN, Sir Charles, iv. 399, n. 5.<br/>

WARREN, Dr.,<br/>

  attends Johnson, iv. 399, 411;<br/>

  member of the Literary Club, i. 479;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 425.<br/>

WARREN, John, of Pembrokeshire, i. 89.<br/>

WARREN, Mr., the Birmingham bookseller, i. 85-9.<br/>

WARRINGTON, iii. 416; v. 441.<br/>

WARTON, Rev. Dr. Joseph, Headmaster of Winchester College,<br/>

  <i>Adventurer</i>, wrote for the, i. 252, n. 2, 253;<br/>

  Bolingbroke's share in Pope's <i>Essay on Man</i>, iii. 402, n. 1;<br/>

  Burke and Chambers, recommends, to W. G. Hamilton, i. 519;<br/>

  Clarke's, Dr., agility, i. 3, n. 2;<br/>

  Donatus on a passage in Terence, ii. 358, n. 3;<br/>

  enthusiast by rule, iv. 33, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Essay on Pope</i>, Johnson reviews it, i. 309; iii. 229;<br/>

    second volume delayed, i. 448; ii. 167;<br/>

  Garrick's offence at Johnson, ii. 192, n. 2;<br/>

  Goldsmith's conversation, i. 412, n. 1;<br/>

  Hamilton, W. G., letter from, i. 519;<br/>

  Hooke's payment from the Duchess of Marlborough, v. 175, nn. 3 and 5;<br/>

  inoculates his children, iv. 293, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson and Dr. Burney's son, in. 367;<br/>

    estrangement with, i. 270, n. i; ii. 41, n. 1;<br/>

    letters to him: See under JOHNSON, letters;<br/>

  <i>Lear</i>, note on, ii. 115;<br/>

  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;<br/>

  manner, lively, ii. 41;<br/>

    taken off by Johnson, ib., n. 1; iv. 27, n. 3;<br/>

  Pope's cousin, meets, iii. 71, n. 5;<br/>

  rapturist, ii. 41, n. 1;<br/>

  Round-Robin, signs the, iii. 83;<br/>

  a scholar, yet a fool, iii. 84, n. 2;<br/>

  Thompson, praises, iii. 117;<br/>

  <i>World, The</i>, origin of the name, i. 202, n. 4;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 325, 418, n. 1, 449, n. 1; ii. 34, n. 1; iii. 125.<br/>

WARTON, Mrs. Joseph, i. 496, n. 2.<br/>

WARTON, Rev. Thomas,<br/>

  account of him, i. 270, n. 1;<br/>

  appearance, ii. 41, n. 1;<br/>

    described by Miss Burney, iv. 7, n. 1;<br/>

  Boswell and Johnson call on him, ii. 446;<br/>

  Chatterton's forgery, exposes, iii. 50, n, 5; iv. 141, n. 1;<br/>

  contributions to the <i>Life of Johnson</i>, i. 8;<br/>

  <i>Eagle and Robin Redbreast</i>, i. 117, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Heroick Epistle</i>, the authorship of the, iv. 315;<br/>

  Huggins, quarrels with, iv. 6;<br/>

  <i>Idler</i>, contributed to the, i. 330;<br/>

  Johnson, estrangement with, i. 270, n. 1;<br/>

    letters to him: See under JOHNSON, letters;<br/>

    Oxford visit in 1754, i. 270;<br/>

    parodies his poetry, iii. 158, n. 3;<br/>

    preface to his <i>Dictionary</i>, i. 297, n. 3;<br/>

  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;<br/>

  <i>Observations on Spenser's Fairy Queen</i>, i. 270, n. 2, 276, 289; iv. 6;<br/>

  <i>Ode on the First of April</i>, iii. 159, n. 1;<br/>

  poet-laureate, i. 185, n. 1;<br/>

  Professor of Poetry, i. 323, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Progress of Discontent</i>, i. 283, n. 2; iii. 323, n. 4;<br/>

  pupils and lectures, i. 279, n. 2;<br/>

  Savage's <i>Bastard</i>, i. 166;<br/>

  <i>Shakespeare</i>, notes on, i. 335-6; ii. 114;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 78, n. 2, 79, n. 1, 325.<br/>

WARTON, Rev. Thomas (the father of the two Wartons), i. 449, n. 1.<br/>

WASHINGTON, George, ii. 478.<br/>

WASSE, Christopher, v. 445.<br/>

WASTE, iii. 265, 317.<br/>

WATER, Johnson's advice to drink it, iii. 169.<br/>

WATERS, Ambrose, iv. 402, n. 2.<br/>

WATERS, Mr., Paris banker, ii. 3.<br/>

WATFORD, ii. 204, n. 1, 301, n. 1.<br/>

WATSON, Richard, Bishop of Llandaff,<br/>

  bishops' revenues, iv. 118, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Chemical Essays</i>, iv. 118, 232, n. 3;<br/>

  how to rise in the world, ii. 323, n. 1.<br/>

WATSON, Professor Robert., of St. Andrews,<br/>

  <i>History of Philip II</i>, iii. 104;<br/>

  Johnson, entertains, v. 58-60, 64, 68;<br/>

    manners, wonders at,  v. 70;<br/>

  talks on composition, v. 66.<br/>

WATSON, Mr., 'out in the '45,' v. 158, n. 3.<br/>

WATTS, Dr. Isaac,<br/>

  Abney, Sir Thomas, lived with, i. 493, n. 3;<br/>

  descends from the dignity of science, ii. 408, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson adds him to the <i>Lives</i>, iii. 126, 370; iv. 35, n. 3;<br/>

    recommends his <i>Works</i>, iv. 311;<br/>

  poetry, his, better in its design than in itself, iii. 358;<br/>

  taught Dissenters elegance of style, i. 312.<br/>

WEALTH. See MONEY.<br/>

<i>Wealth of Nations</i>. See/ SMITH, Adam.<br/>

WEATHER and Seasons,<br/>

  their influence acknowledged, i. 332, n. 2; ii. 263;<br/>

iv. 259, n. 3, 353, 360;<br/>

  ridiculed by Johnson in <i>The Idler</i>, i. 332; ii. 263, n. 2;<br/>

    at the Mitre, i. 426;<br/>

    'all imagination,' i. 452;<br/>

    weather does not affect the frame, ii. 358; iii. 305;<br/>

  ridiculed by Reynolds, i. 332, n. 2;<br/>

    Gray's 'fantastic foppery,' i. 203, n. 3;<br/>

  talking of the weather, i. 426, n. 1; iv. 360, n. 2.<br/>

WEBSTER, Rev. Dr. Alexander,<br/>

  account of him, ii. 269, n. 4; v. 50;<br/>

  his manuscript account of Scotch parishes, ii. 274, n. 2;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 270-2, 275; v. 387, n. 2, 391, 394, 397.<br/>

WEDDERBURNE, Alexander. See LOUGHBOROUGH, Lord.<br/>

WEDDERBURNE, Mr., of Ballandean, iii. 214, n, 1.<br/>

WELCH, Father, ii. 401.<br/>

WELCH, Miss, iii. 217.<br/>

WELCH, Saunders,<br/>

  account of him, iii. 216; death, iii. 219, n. 1;<br/>

  examination of a boy, iv. 184;<br/>

  Johnson, letter from, iii. 217;<br/>

  London poor, state of the, iii. 401.<br/>

WELL-BRED MAN, distinguished from an ill-bred, iv. 319.<br/>

WELSH. See under WALES.<br/>

WELWYN, iv. 119; v. 270.<br/>

WENDOVER, ii. 16, n. 1.<br/>

WENTWORTH, Mr., master of Stourbridge School, i. 49.<br/>

WENTWORTH HOUSE, 'public dinners,' iv. 367, n. 3.<br/>

WESLEY, Rev. Charles,<br/>

  ill-used by Oglethorpe, i. 127, n. 4;<br/>

  'more stationary man than his brother,' iii. 297.<br/>

WESLEY, Rev. John,<br/>

  Behmen's <i>Mysterium Magnum</i>, ii. 122, n. 6;<br/>

  bleeding, opposed to, iii. 152, n. 3;<br/>

  Boswell introduced to him by Johnson, iii. 394;<br/>

  <i>Calm Address to our American Colonies</i>, v. 35, n. 3;<br/>

  Cheyne's rules of diet, iii. 27, n. 1;<br/>

  conversation, iii. 230, 297;<br/>

  Dodd, Dr., visits, iii. 121, n. 3;<br/>

  Edinburgh, filthy state of, v. 23, n. 1;<br/>

  farmers dull and discontented, iii. 353, n. 5;<br/>

  French prisoners, i. 353, n. 2;<br/>

  ghost, believed in a Newcastle, iii. 297, 394;<br/>

  Hall, Rev. Mr., his brother-in-law, iv. 92, n. 3;<br/>

  highwayman, never met a, iii. 239, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson complains that he is never at leisure, iii. 230;<br/>

    letters to him, iii. 394; v. 35, n. 3;<br/>

    spends two hours with, iii. 230, n. 3;<br/>

  journeys on foot, i. 64, n. 4;<br/>

  Law's <i>Serious Call</i>, i. 68, n. 2;<br/>

  leisure, never at, iii. 230;<br/>

  luxury, attacks the apologists of, iii. 56, n. 2;<br/>

  manners and cheerfulness, iii. 230, nn. 3 and 4;<br/>

  Marshalsea prison, i. 303, n. 1;<br/>

  Meier, Rev. Mr., ii. 253, n. 2;<br/>

  Methodists and a Justice of the Peace, i. 397, n. 1;<br/>

    name of, i. 458, n. 3;<br/>

  Moravians, quarrels with the, iii. 122, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>muddy</i>, uses the term, ii. 362, n. 3;<br/>

  Nash, silences, iv. 289, n. 1;<br/>

  Newgate prisons in London and Bristol, iii. 431, n. 1;<br/>

  'old woman, an,' iii. 172;<br/>

  Oxford, devotional meetings at, i. 58, n. 3;<br/>

  Paoli's arrival in England, ii. 71, n. 2;<br/>

  plain preaching, i. 459, n. 1;<br/>

  polite audiences, iii. 353, n. 5;<br/>

  politician, a, v. 35, n. 3;<br/>

  prisoners under sentence of death, iii. 121, n. 3; iv. 329, n, 2;<br/>

    almost regrets a reprieve to one, v. 201, n. 2;<br/>

  readings and writings, range of his, iii. 297, n. 1;<br/>

  Robertson's <i>Charles V</i>, ii. 236, n. 4;<br/>

  rod, taught to fear the, i. 46, n. 4;<br/>

  Roman Catholics, attacks the, v. 35, n. 3;<br/>

  Rousseau and Voltaire, v. 378, n. 1;<br/>

  Rutty, Dr., iii. 170, n. 4;<br/>

  St. Andrews, students of, v. 63, n. 2;<br/>

  sister, his, Mrs. Hall, iv. 92;<br/>

  slaves, religious education of, ii. 27, n. 1;<br/>

  solitary religion, v. 62, n. 5;<br/>

  tea, against the use of, i. 313, n. 2;<br/>

  travels and sufferings, ii. 123, n. 3; iii. 297, n. 1;<br/>

  University life in England and Scotland, i. 63, n. 1;<br/>

  Warburton, answers, v. 93;<br/>

  witchcraft, believes in, ii. 178, n. 3.<br/>

WESLEY, Mrs. (mother of Charles and John Wesley), i. 46, n. 4.<br/>

WEST, Gilbert, in the army, iii. 267, n. 1;<br/>

  translation of Pindar, iv. 28.<br/>

WEST, Richard, describes Christ Church, Oxford, i. 76, n. 1;<br/>

  lines on his own death, iii. 165, n. 3.<br/>

WEST, Rev. W., edition of <i>Rasselas</i>, i. 340, n. 3.<br/>

WEST INDIAN ISLANDS in 1779, iii. 408, n. 4;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 455:<br/>

  see JAMAICA and SLAVES.<br/>

WESTCOTE, Lord, Johnson and the Thrales visit him, v. 456, n. 1;<br/>

   Lord Lyttelton's vision, iv. 298;<br/>

   portrait at Streatham, iv. 158, n. 1;<br/>

   mentioned, iv. 57, n. 1, 58, n. 3.<br/>

WESTERN ISLANDS. See under BOSWELL, <i>Journal of a Tour to the<br/>

   Hebrides, Journey to the Western<br/>

   Islands</i>, MARTIN, M., and SCOTLAND, Hebrides.<br/>

WESTMINSTER. See under LONDON.<br/>

WESTMINSTER, Deanery of, resignation of the, iii. 113, n. 2.<br/>

WESTMINSTER ABBEY, Chambers's epitaph, i. 219, n. 1;<br/>

  Cibber's, Mrs., grave, v. 126, n, 5;<br/>

  Goldsmith's epitaph, iii. 82;<br/>

    and Johnson at the Poets' Corner, ii. 238;<br/>

  Handel musical meeting, iv. 283;<br/>

  Johnson's grave, iv. 419, 423;<br/>

  Jonson's, Ben, grave, v. 402, n. 5;<br/>

  Macpherson's grave, ii. 298, n. 2;<br/>

  Milton's monument, i. 227, n. 4;<br/>

  Reynolds describes its monuments, iv. 423, n. 2;<br/>

  'walls disgraced with an English inscription,' iii. 85.<br/>

WESTMORELAND, seventh Earl of,<br/>

  Chancellor of the University of Oxford, i. 348, n. 2;<br/>

  meets the Pretender in London, i. 279, n. 5.<br/>

WETHERELL, Rev. Dr., Boswell and Johnson visit him, ii. 440;<br/>

  Johnson's letter to him, ii. 424;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 356; iv. 308.<br/>

WEY, River, ii. 136, n. 2; iii. 362, n. 5.<br/>

WHARNCLIFFE, Lord, iii. 399, n. 1.<br/>

WHARTON, Marquis of, iv. 317, n. 3.<br/>

WHARTON, Rev. Henry, ii. 242, n. 3.<br/>

WHEAT, price of, in 1778, iii. 226, n. 2.<br/>

  See CORN.<br/>

WHEATLEY, near Oxford, iv. 308.<br/>

WHEATLEY, Mr. H. B., Wraxall's <i>Memoirs</i>, ii. 40, n. 4.<br/>

  <i>Wheatly and Bennet on the Common Prayer</i>, iv. 212, n. 4.<br/>

WHEELER, Rev. Dr., death, iii. 366, n. 4; iv. 233, n. 3;<br/>

  experience as a country parson, iii. 437;<br/>

  Johnson's liking for his talk, iii. 366, n. 4; 307;<br/>

    letter to him, iii. 366;<br/>

  mentioned, v. 458, n. 1.<br/>

WHEELER, Mr., of Birmingham, v. 458.<br/>

WHIGGISM, corrupted since the Revolution, ii. 117;<br/>

  hounds, its, iv. 40, 63;<br/>

  Lyttelton's vulgar Whiggism, ii. 221;<br/>

  no room for it in heaven, v. 385.<br/>

WHIGS, almsgiving, against, ii. 212;<br/>

  <i>bottomless</i>, iv. 223;<br/>

  defined, i. 294, 431, n. 1;<br/>

  devil, the first Whig the, iii. 326; iv. 317, n. 3;<br/>

  every bad man a Whig, v. 271;<br/>

  Fergusson 'a vile Whig,' ii. 170;<br/>

  governed, not willing to be, ii. 314;<br/>

  hall fireplace, moved the, i. 273;<br/>

  humane one, a, v. 357;<br/>

  'is any King a Whig?' iii. 372, n. 3;<br/>

  nation quiet when they governed, iv. 100;<br/>

  parson's gown, in a, v. 255;<br/>

  pretence to honesty ridiculous, v. 339;<br/>

  scoundrel and Whig, ii. 444;<br/>

  Staffordshire Whig, iii. 326;<br/>

  Tories, enmity with, iv. 291;<br/>

  Tories when in place, i. 129;<br/>

  'Whig dogs,' i. 504.<br/>

WHISTON, John, bookseller, iv. 111.<br/>

WHISTON, William,<br/>

  Bentley's verses iv. 23, n. 3;<br/>

  'Wicked Will Whiston,' ii. 67, n. 1.<br/>

WHITAKER, Rev. John, <i>History of Manchester</i>, iii. 333.<br/>

WHITAKER, Rev. Mr., ii. 108, n. 2.<br/>

WHITBREAD, Samuel, the brewer, iii. 363, n. 5.<br/>

WHITBREAD, Samuel, M.P., the son, bill for parochial schools,<br/>

iv. 200, n. 4.<br/>

WHITBREAD, Miss, iii. 96, n. 1.<br/>

WHITBY, Daniel, <i>Commentary</i>, v. 276.<br/>

WHITBY, Mr., of Heywood, i. 84, n. 2.<br/>

WHITE, Rev. Gilbert,<br/>

  hibernation of swallows, ii. 55, n. 2, 248, n. 1;<br/>

  Oriel College common-room, ii. 443, n. 4.<br/>

WHITE, Rev. Dr., <i>Bampton Lectures</i> of 1784, iv. 443.<br/>

WHITE, Rev. Dr., of Pennsylvania, ii. 207.<br/>

WHITE, Rev. Henry, of Lichfield, iv. 372-3.<br/>

WHITE, Mr., Librarian of the Royal Society, ii. 40, n. 2.<br/>

WHITE, Mr., a factor, v. 122.<br/>

WHITE, Mr., tried to be a philosopher, iii. 305, n. 2.<br/>

WHITE, Mr., v. 427, n. 1.<br/>

WHITE, Mrs., Johnson's servant, iv. 402, n. 2.<br/>

WHITEFIELD, Rev. George,<br/>

  Boswell, personally known to, ii. 79, n. 4;<br/>

  Bristol Newgate, forbidden to preach in the, iii. 433, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson knew him at Oxford, i. 78, n. 2; iii. 409; v. 35;<br/>

  Law's <i>Serious Call</i>, reads, i. 68, n. 2;<br/>

  lower classes, of use to the, iii. 409;<br/>

  mixture of politics and ostentation, v. 35;<br/>

  'old woman, an,' iii. 172;<br/>

  oratory for the mob, v. 36;<br/>

  Oxford, persecuted at, i. 68, n. 1;<br/>

  Pembroke College, servitor of, i. 73, n. 4, 75; v. 122, n. 1;<br/>

  popularity owing to peculiarity, ii. 79; iii. 409;<br/>

  preaching described by Southey and Franklin, ii. 79, n. 4; v. 36, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>sconced</i>, i. 59, n. 3;<br/>

  <i>Spiritual Quixote</i>, ridiculed in the, i. 75, n. 3;<br/>

  Trapp's <i>Sermons</i>, attacked in, i. 140, n. 5.<br/>

WHITEFOORD, Caleb, <i>Cross-readings</i>, iv. 322.<br/>

WHITEHEAD, Paul,<br/>

  Churchill's lines on him, i. 125;<br/>

  Johnson undervalues him, i. 124-5;<br/>

  <i>Manners</i>, i. 125; v. 116.<br/>

WHITEHEAD, William,<br/>

  <i>Birth-day Odes</i>, i. 402, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Elegy to Lord Villiers</i>, iv. 115;<br/>

  Garrick's 'reader' of new plays, i. 402, n. 3;<br/>

    proposes him to Goldsmith  as arbitrator, iii. 320, n. 2;<br/>

  grand nonsense, i. 402;<br/>

  <i>Memoirs</i> by Mason, i. 31;<br/>

  poet-laureate, i. 185, n. 1.<br/>

WHITEWAY, Mrs., i. 452, n. 2.<br/>

WHITING, Mrs., iv. 402, n. 2.<br/>

'WHO rules o'er freemen,' iv. 312.<br/>

<i>Whole Duty of Man</i>,<br/>

  its authorship, ii. 239;<br/>

  Johnson made to read it, i. 67;<br/>

    recommends it, iv. 311.<br/>

<i>Wholesome</i> severities, v. 423.<br/>

WHOREMONGER, ii. 172.<br/>

WHYTE, S.,<br/>

  Home's gold medal, ii. 320, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's walk, i. 485, n. 1;<br/>

  Sheridan and the Irish Parliament, iii. 377, n. 2;<br/>

  Sheridan's pension, i. 386, n. 1.<br/>

WICKEDNESS, no abilities required for it, v. 217.<br/>

WICKHAM, iv. 192.<br/>

WIDOWS, ii. 77.<br/>

WIFE,<br/>

  'Artemisias,' ii. 76;<br/>

  buying lace for one, ii. 352;<br/>

  choosing fools for wives, v. 226;<br/>

  death of one, iii. 419;<br/>

  disputes with them, v. 226, n. 1;<br/>

  learned, none the worse for being, ii. 76, 128;<br/>

  negligent of pleasing, ii. 56;<br/>

  Overbury's lines, ii. 76;<br/>

  praise from one, i. 210;<br/>

  religious, should be, ii. 76;<br/>

  singing publicly for hire, ii. 369;<br/>

  story of an unfaithful wife, v. 389;<br/>

    of one who made a secret purse, iv. 319;<br/>

  studious or argumentative, iv. 32;<br/>

  superiority of talents, ii. 56.<br/>

WIGAN, iii. 135, n. 1.<br/>

WIGHT, Mr., a Scotch advocate, iii. 212, n. 2.<br/>

WIGHTMAN, General, v. 140, n. 3.<br/>

WIGS,<br/>

  bag-wigs now worn by physicians, iii. 288;<br/>

  tye-wigs, ib., n. 4;<br/>

  flowing bob-wig, iii. 325, n. 3;<br/>

  powdered, iii. 254:<br/>

  See under JOHNSON, wigs.<br/>

WILCOX, the bookseller, i. 102, n. 2.<br/>

<i>Wildair, Sir Harry</i>, ii. 465.<br/>

WILKES, Dr., i. 148.<br/>

WILKES, Friar, ii. 399.<br/>

WILKES, John,<br/>

  Alderman, elected, iii. 460;<br/>

  Aylesbury, member for, iii. 73;<br/>

  Beauclerk's library, iv. 105;<br/>

  Boswell<br/>

    apologises for his intimacy with him, iii. 64, n. 3;<br/>

      defends him, v. 339, n. 5;<br/>

      relishes his excellence, in. 64;<br/>

    brings Johnson and him together, iii. 64;<br/>

      proposes a third meeting, iv. 224, n. 2;<br/>

    companion in Italy, ii. 11;<br/>

    dines with him, ii. 378, n. 1, 436, n. 1;<br/>

    enlivened by his sallies, i. 395;<br/>

    receives a letter from 'Lord Mayor Wilkes,' ii. 381, n. 1;<br/>

    writes to him, iv. 224, n. 2;<br/>

  Burke's pun on him, iii. 322; v. 32, n. 3;<br/>

    want of taste, iv. 104;<br/>

  City and Blackfriars Bridge, i. 351, n. 1;<br/>

  City Chamberlain, iv. 101, n. 2;<br/>

  Courts of Justice afraid of him, iii. 46, n. 5;<br/>

  <i>Dedication of Mortimer,</i> i. 353, n. 1;<br/>

  dress, iii. 68; iv. 101, n. 2;<br/>

  English tenacious of forms, iv. 104;<br/>

  <i>Fall of Mortimer</i>, iii. 78, n, 4;<br/>

  <i>False Alarm</i>, answer to the, iv. 30;<br/>

  Garrick's want of a friend, iii. 386;<br/>

    wit, like Chesterfield's, iii. 69;<br/>

  general warrants, i. 394, n. 1; ii. 72, n. 3, 73;<br/>

  George III praises his good breeding, iii. 68, n. 4;<br/>

  goat, the, not the kid, iv. 107, n. 2;<br/>

  Gordon Riots, iii. 430;<br/>

  'grave, sober, decent,' iii. 77;<br/>

  <i>Heroic Epistle</i>, attacked in the, v. 186;<br/>

  Hogarth, caricatured by, v. 186;<br/>

  Horace, a contested passage in, iii. 73;<br/>

  House of Commons afraid of him, iv. 140, n. 1;<br/>

    expunges the resolution for his expulsion, ii. 112:<br/>

    See under MIDDLESEX ELECTION;<br/>

    how to speak at its bar, iii. 224;<br/>

  Inverary, visits, iii. 73;<br/>

  'Jack Ketch,' iii. 66;<br/>

  Johnson's account of 'Jack's' conversation, iii. 183;<br/>

    'animosity' against him, i. 349;<br/>

    attacks him, ii. 135, n. 1; iii. 64; v. 339;<br/>

    attacks, i. 429, n. 1; iii. 64, n. 2;<br/>

      after their reconciliation, in. 79, n. 1;<br/>

    calls on, iv. 107;<br/>

    compared with, iii. 64, 78;<br/>

    <i>Dictionary</i>, letter <i>H</i>, i. 300, 349, n. 1;<br/>

    meets, at Mr. Dilly's, iii. 64-79, 201; v. 339, n. 5;<br/>

      second meeting, iv. 101-7;<br/>

    invites, to dinner, iv. 224, n. 2;<br/>

    letter to him, iv. 224, n. 2;<br/>

    and Mrs. Macaulay's footman, iii. 78;<br/>

    political definitions, i. 295, n. 1;<br/>

    repartee about a resolution of the House, iv. 104;<br/>

    says that he 'should be well ducked,' i. 394;<br/>

    sends him the Lives, iv. 107;<br/>

    talking of liberty, iii. 224;<br/>

    tête-à-tête with, iv. 107;<br/>

  <i>Junius</i>, suspected to be, iii. 376, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Letter to Samuel Johnson, LL.D.</i>, iv. 30, n. 3;<br/>

  libel, prosecution for, iii. 78;<br/>

  library, sells his, iv. 105, n. 2;<br/>

  Lord Mayor, iii. 68, n. 4, 459-460;<br/>

    kept from being, v. 339;<br/>

  <i>Memoirs</i> by Almon, i. 349, n. 1;<br/>

  Middlesex election: See under MIDDLESEX ELECTION;<br/>

  Monks of Medmenham Abbey, i. 125, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>North Briton</i>, No. 45, i. 394, n. 1; ii. 72, n. 3;<br/>

    Earl of Bute attacked, ii. 300, n. 5;<br/>

  oratory, on, iv. 104;<br/>

  'phoenix of convivial felicity,' iii. 183;<br/>

  physiognomy, ii. 154, n. 1;<br/>

  Pope's repartee, iv. 50;<br/>

  prison, in, ii. 111, n. 2; iii. 46, n. 5, 460;<br/>

  profanity, his, iv. 216;<br/>

  quotation, censures, iv. 102;<br/>

  riots in London in 1768, iii. 46, n. 5;<br/>

  Scotland, raillery at, iii. 73, 77; iv. 101;<br/>

  sentimental anecdote, iv. 347, n. 2;<br/>

  Settle, the City Poet, iii. 75;<br/>

  Shelburne, opposed by, iv. 175, n. 1;<br/>

  Shelburne and Malagrida, iv. 174, n. 5;<br/>

  Sheriff, v. 186, n. 4;<br/>

  Smollett's letter to him, i. 348;<br/>

  'Wilkes and Liberty,' ii. 60, n. 2; v. 312;<br/>

  'Wilkite, no,' iii. 430, n. 4.<br/>

WILKES, Miss, iv. 224, n. 2.<br/>

WILKIE, William, D.D., Hume's Scotch Homer, ii. 53, n. 1; iv. 186, n. 2.<br/>

WILKIN, Simon, editor of Sir Thomas Brown's <i>Works</i>, iii. 293, n. 2.<br/>

WILKINS, Bishop, ii. 256, n. 3.<br/>

WILKINS, landlord of the Three Crowns, Lichfield, ii. 461, 462; iii. 411.<br/>

WILKS, the actor,<br/>

  acted Juba in <i>Cato</i>, v. 126, n. 2;<br/>

  Addison's loan to Steele, iv. 53;<br/>

  Johnson celebrates his virtues, i. 167, n, 1;<br/>

  manager of Drury Lane Theatre, v. 244, n. 2.<br/>

WILL, free. See FREE WILL.<br/>

WILL-MAKING, ii. 261; iv. 402, n. 1.<br/>

WILLES, Chief Justice,<br/>

  'attached to the Prince of Wales,' i. 147, n. 1;<br/>

  Bet Flint's trial, iv. 103, n. 3;<br/>

  Johnson's schoolfellow, i. 45, n. 4.<br/>

WILLIAM III,<br/>

  Dodwell, Henry, will not persecute, v. 437, n. 3;<br/>

  Irish, not the lawful sovereign of the, ii. 255;<br/>

  Johnson's_ Dictionary_, in, i. 295, n. 1;<br/>

  resplendent qualities, his, ii. 341, n. 4;<br/>

  Revolution Society, commemorated by the, iv. 40, n. 4;<br/>

  Shebbeare, satirised by, ii. 112, n. 3; iii. 15, n. 3;<br/>

  torture in Scotland, legal in his reign, i. 467, n. 1;<br/>

  'worthless scoundrel,' ii. 341-2;<br/>

  'that scoundrel,' v. 255;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 342; v. 234.<br/>

WILLIAMS, Anna,<br/>

  account of her, i. 232; ii. 99; iv. 235, n. i, 239, n. 4;<br/>

  allowance from Mrs. Montagu, iii. 48, n. 1; iv. 65, n. 1;<br/>

    from Lady Philipps, v. 276, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Adventurer</i>, Bathurst's Essays in the, i. 254;<br/>

  benefit at Drury Lane, i. 159 n. 1, 393, n. 1;<br/>

  Bet Flint, did not love, iv. 103, n. 1;<br/>

  Bolt Court, room in, ii. 427, n. 1;<br/>

  Boswells envy of Goldsmith's taking tea with her, i. 421;<br/>

    'a privileged man,' i. 463; ii. 99;<br/>

    and the Jack Wilkes dinner, iii. 67;<br/>

    'loves,' ii. 145;<br/>

  carving, ii. 99, n. 2;<br/>

  conversation, i. 463;<br/>

  death, iv. 65, n. 1, 235;<br/>

  drunkenness, on, ii. 435, n. 7;<br/>

  eating, mode of, iii. 26;<br/>

  electrical experiments, ii. 26, n. 2;<br/>

  Garrick refuses her an order, i. 392;<br/>

  Gordon Riots, left London at the, iii. 435;<br/>

  'hates everybody,' iii. 368;<br/>

  Hetherington's Charity, ii. 286;<br/>

  illness, ii. 412; iii. 93, 95; 123, 128, 132, 211, 215, 363;<br/>

iv. 142, 170, 233-4;<br/>

  jealousy, iii. 55;<br/>

  Johnson's attention to her, iii. 341;<br/>

    pleasure in her society, i. 232, n. 1; iii. 462;<br/>

iv. 235, 239, 241, 249, n. 2;<br/>

    takes the sacrament in her room, iv. 235, n. 1, 270;<br/>

    tea with her, i. 421; ii. 99;<br/>

    turns Captain Macheath, iv. 95;<br/>

  Johnson's Court, room in, ii. 5;<br/>

  <i>Miscellanies</i>, i. 148, 177, n. 2; ii. 25-6; iii. 104;<br/>

  peevishness, iii. 26, 128, 220;<br/>

  quarrels with the rest of the household, iii. 368, 461;<br/>

  second sight, instance of, ii. 150;<br/>

  tea, mode of making, ii. 99;<br/>

  will, her, iv. 241;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 227, n. 2, 241, 242, 274, 326, 328, 350, n. 3,<br/>

369, 382; ii. 45, 77, 164, 209, 214, 215, 226, 242, 269, 310, 333,<br/>

357, 360, 386, 434; iii. 6, 44, 79, 92, 222, 269, 271, 313, 380;<br/>

iv. 92, 210; v. 98.<br/>

WILLIAMS, Sir Charles Hanbury,<br/>

  Johnson's  pamphlet against him, ii. 33;<br/>

    speaks contemptuously of him, v. 268;<br/>

  lines on Pulteney, v. 268, n. 3.<br/>

WILLIAMS, Helen Maria, iv. 282.<br/>

WILLIAMS, Zachariah, i. 274, n. 2, 301.<br/>

WILLIS, Dr. Thomas, <i>De Anima Brutorum</i>, v. 314, n. 1.<br/>

WILMOT, Chief Justice, i. 45, n. 4.<br/>

<i>Wilson against Smith and Armour</i>, ii. 196, n. 1.<br/>

WILSON, Father, ii. 390.<br/>

WILSON, Florence, <i>De tranquillitate animi</i>, iii. 215.<br/>

WILSON, Rev. Mr.,<br/>

  dedicates his <i>Archaeological Dictionary</i> to Johnson, iv. 162.<br/>

WILSON, Thomas, Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin, i. 489.<br/>

WILTON,<br/>

  Boswell visits it, ii. 326, n. 5, 371;<br/>

  writes to Johnson from it, iii. 118, 122.<br/>

WILTON, Miss, ii. 274.<br/>

WILTSHIRE,<br/>

  militia bill of 1756, i. 307, n. 4;<br/>

  mentioned, iv. 237.<br/>

WINCHESTER,<br/>

  capital convictions in 1784, iv. 328, n. 1;<br/>

  cathedral, iii. 457;<br/>

  Franklin visits it, ii. 60, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson visits it in 1762, i. 496, n. 2;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 115.<br/>

WINCHESTER COLLEGE,<br/>

  Johnson places Burney's son there, iii. 367;<br/>

  Morell visits it, v. 350, n. 1;<br/>

  Peregrine Pickle's governor, v. 185, n. 2.<br/>

WINDHAM, Right Hon. William,<br/>

  account of him in 1784, iv. 407, n. 2;<br/>

  balloons, love of, iv. 356, n. 1;<br/>

  Burke's merriment, iv. 276;<br/>

  Essex Head Club, member of the, iv. 254, 438;<br/>

  Eumelian Club, member of the, iv. 394, n. 4;<br/>

  Glasgow University, at, iii. 119;<br/>

  Horsley's character, iv. 437;<br/>

  Johnson's advice to him, iv. 200, n. 4;<br/>

    at Ashbourn, visits, iv. 356, 362, n. 2;<br/>

    attends, when dying, iv. 407, 411, 415, n. 1;<br/>

      his servant nurses him, iv. 418, n. 2;<br/>

    bequest to him, iv. 402, n, 2;<br/>

      gift, iv. 440;<br/>

    college days, i. 70, n. 3;<br/>

    dexterity in retort, iv. 185;<br/>

    funeral, iv. 419;<br/>

    and Heberden, iv. 399, n. 6;<br/>

    Latin read with pleasure by few, v. 80, n. 2;<br/>

    letters to him, iv. 227, 362;<br/>

    never read the <i>Odyssey</i> through, i. 70, 72, n. 3;<br/>

    pension, proposed increase of, iv. 338, n. 2;<br/>

    recommends Frank to him, iv. 401, n. 4;<br/>

  Literary Club, member of the, i. 479;<br/>

  opposition to good measures, iv. 200, n. 4;<br/>

  portrait, ii. 25, n. 2;<br/>

  rascal, will make a very pretty, iv. 200;<br/>

  Secretary for Ireland, iv. 200, 227, n. 2;<br/>

  wants and acquisitions, iii. 354;<br/>

  Wapping, explores, iv. 201, n. 1;<br/>

  Warton's, Dr., amazement, ii. 41, n. 1;<br/>

  mentioned, ii. 306; iv. 344.<br/>

WINDOW-TAX, v. 301, n. 1.<br/>

WINDSOR,<br/>

  Beauclerk's house, i. 250;<br/>

  Johnson and the Mayor, iv. 312, n. 4;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 400, n. 2.<br/>

WINDUS, John, <i>Journey to Mequinez</i>, v. 445.<br/>

<i>Windward</i>, defined, i. 293.<br/>

WINE,<br/>

  abstinence a great deduction from life, iii. 169, 245, 327;<br/>

    not a diminution of happiness, iii. 245;<br/>

    does not admit of doubting, iii. 250;<br/>

    reasons for it, ii. 435; iii. 245;<br/>

  advice to one who has drunk freely, ii. 436; iii. 389;<br/>

  benevolence, drunk from, iii. 327;<br/>

  bottles drunk at a sitting, iii. 243, n. 4;<br/>

  claret and ignorance, iii. 335;<br/>

  claret, port, and brandy distinguished, iii. 381; iv. 79;<br/>

  conversation and benevolence, effect on, iii. 41, 327;<br/>

  daily consumption of wine, iii. 27, n. 1;<br/>

  different, makes a man, v. 325;<br/>

  'drives away care,' ii. 193;<br/>

  drunk, the art of getting, iii. 389;<br/>

  drunk for want of intellectual resources, ii. 130;<br/>

  freezing, iv. 151, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>in vino veritas</i>, ii. 188;<br/>

  Johnson's abstinence, i. 103, n. 3;<br/>

    advice to drink wine, ib.;<br/>

      not to drink it, iii. 169;<br/>

    'drink water and put in for a hundred,' iii. 306;<br/>

  life not shortened by a free use of it, iii. 170<br/>

    (See under JOHNSON, wine);<br/>

  melancholy increased by it, i. 446;<br/>

  patron, drinking to please a, iii. 329:<br/>

  See under BOSWELL, wine, DRINKING and SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS.<br/>

WINGS OF IRON, iv. 356, n. 1.<br/>

WINIFRED'S WELL, v. 442.<br/>

WINNINGTON, Thomas, i. 502.<br/>

WIRGMAN, keeper of a toy-shop, iii. 325.<br/>

WIRTEMBERG, Prince of, ii. 180.<br/>

WISE, Francis, Radclivian Librarian,<br/>

  account of him, i. 275, n. 4;<br/>

  Johnson visits him at Elsfield, i. 273;<br/>

  mentioned, i. 278-9, 282, 289, 322.<br/>

WISEDOME, Robert, v. 444.<br/>

WISHART, George, THE REFORMER, v. 63, n. 3.<br/>

WISHART, Dr. William, v. 252.<br/>

WIT,<br/>

  basis of all wit is truth, ii. 90, n. 3;<br/>

  Chesterfield on the property in it, iii. 351, n. 1;<br/>

  defined in Barrow's <i>Sermon</i>, iv. 105, n. 4;<br/>

  generally false reasoning, iii. 23, n. 3.<br/>

WITCHES,<br/>

  evidence of their having existed, ii. 178;<br/>

  Johnson's disbelief in them, ii. 179, n. 1;<br/>

  'machinery of poetry,' iv. 17;<br/>

  Shakespeare's, iii. 382; v. 76, 115, 347;<br/>

  Wesley's belief in them, ii. 178, n. 3;<br/>

  witchcraft, punished by death, v. 45;<br/>

    abolished by act of parliament, ib.;<br/>

    last executions, v. 46, n. 1.<br/>

WITNESSES, examination of, v. 243.<br/>

WITS,<br/>

  a celebrated one, iii. 388;<br/>

  the female wits, iv. 103, n. 1.<br/>

WITTEMBERG, iii. 122, n, 2.<br/>

WOFFINGTON, Margaret (Peg),<br/>

  Garrick's tea, iii. 264;<br/>

  sister of Mrs. Cholmondeley, iii. 318, n. 3.<br/>

WOLCOT, John (Peter Pindar), v. 415, n. 4.<br/>

WOLFE, General,' choice of difficulties,' v. 146.<br/>

WOLVERHAMPTON,<br/>

  Elwall the quaker ironmonger, ii. 164;<br/>

  epitaph in the church, i. 149, n. 2.<br/>

WOMEN,<br/>

  Addison's time, in, iv. 217, n. 4;<br/>

  carefulness with money, iv. 33;<br/>

  cookery, cannot make a book of, iii. 285;<br/>

  employment of them, ii. 362, n. 1;<br/>

  envy of men's vices, iv. 291;<br/>

  few opportunities of improving their condition, iv. 33;<br/>

  fortune, of, iii. 3;<br/>

  genteel, more, than men, iii. 53;<br/>

  gluttony, i. 468, n. 1;<br/>

  Greek and pudding-making, i. 122, n. 4;<br/>

  indifferent to characters of men, iv. 291;<br/>

  knowledge, none the worse for, ii. 76; v. 226;<br/>

  little things, can take up with, iii. 242;<br/>

  marrying a pretty woman, iv. 131;<br/>

  men have more liberty allowed them, iii. 286;<br/>

  natural claims, ii. 419;<br/>

  over-match for men, v. 226;<br/>

  Papists, surprising that they are not, iv. 289;<br/>

  pious, not more, than men, iv. 289;<br/>

  portrait-painting improper for them, ii. 362;<br/>

  power given them by nature and law, v. 226, n. 2;<br/>

  preaching, i. 463;<br/>

  quality, of, iii. 353;<br/>

  reading, iii. 333; iv. 217, n. 4;<br/>

  soldiers, as, v. 229;<br/>

  temptations, have fewer, iii. 287;<br/>

  understandings better cultivated, iii. 3;<br/>

  virtuous, more, than of old, iii. 3.<br/>

Women Servants, wages, ii. 217.<br/>

Women of the Town, how far admitted to taverns, iv. 75;<br/>

  narrate their histories to Johnson, i. 223, n. 2; iv. 396;<br/>

  one rescued by him, iv. 321;<br/>

  wretched life, i. 457.<br/>

Wonders, catching greedily at them, i. 498, n. 4;<br/>

  propagating them, iii. 229, n. 3.<br/>

Wood, Anthony à, <i>Assembly Man</i>, v. 57, n. 2;<br/>

  on Burton's tutor at Christ Church, i. 59;<br/>

  Rawlinson's collections for a continuation of the <i>Athenae</i>,<br/>

iv. 161, n. 1;<br/>

  styles Blackmore gentleman, ii. 126, n. 4.<br/>

Woodcocks, ii. 55, 248.<br/>

Woodhouse, the poetical shoemaker, i. 225, n. 1, 520; ii. 127.<br/>

Woodstock. See BLENHEIM.<br/>

Woodward, Henry, the actor, ii. 208, n. 5.<br/>

Woodward, John, iv. 23, n. 3.<br/>

Woollen Act, ii. 453, n. 2.<br/>

Woolston, Rev. Thomas, v. 419, n. 2,<br/>

Woolwich, iii. 268.<br/>

Worchester, Gwynn's bridge over the Severn, v. 454, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson visits it, v. 456;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 176, n. 1.<br/>

Worcester, Battle of, iv. 234, n. 1; v. 319.<br/>

<i>Word to the Wise</i>, iii. 113.<br/>

Words, big words for little matters, i. 471;<br/>

  words describing manners soon require notes, ii. 212.<br/>

Wordsworth, William,<br/>

  <i>Edinburgh Review</i> and Lord Byron, iv. 115, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Excursion</i>, quoted, v. 424;<br/>

  lines to Lady Fleming, i, 461, n. 5;<br/>

  Lonsdale's, first Lord, cruelty to him, v. 113, n. 1;<br/>

  poet-laureate, i. 185, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Solitary Reaper</i>, v. 117, n. 3;<br/>

  'We live by admiration,' ii. 360, n. 3.<br/>

Work. See LABOUR.<br/>

<i>Work</i> him, iv. 261, n. 3; v. 243.<br/>

Workhouse, parish, iii. 187.<br/>

World, complaints of it unjust, iv. 172;<br/>

  counterfeiting happiness, ii. 169, n. 3;<br/>

  despised, not to be, i. 144, n. 2;<br/>

  Johnson's knowledge of it, i. 215;<br/>

    likes the society of a man of the world, iii. 21, n. 3;<br/>

  judgment must be accepted, i. 200;<br/>

  knowledge not strained through books, i. 105;<br/>

  peevishly represented as very unjust, iii. 237, n. 1;<br/>

  running about it, i. 215;<br/>

  running from it, iv. 161, n. 3.<br/>

World, The, a club, iv. 102, n. 4.<br/>

<i>World, The</i>, Bedlam, visitors to, ii. 374, n. 1;<br/>

  Chesterfield's papers on the <i>Dictionary</i>, i. 257-9;<br/>

  confounded with <i>The World</i> of 1790, iii. 16, n. 1;<br/>

  contributors, i. 257, n. 3; v. 48, 238;<br/>

  Johnson thinks little of it, i. 420;<br/>

  name chosen by Dodsley, i. 202, n. 4.<br/>

<i>World, The</i>, newspaper of 1790, iii. 16, n. 1.<br/>

<i>World Displayed, Introduction to the</i>, i. 345.<br/>

WORRALL, T., i. 166, n. 4.<br/>

WORSHIP OF IMAGES, iii. 17, 188.<br/>

WORTHINGTON, Dr., V. 443, 449, 453.<br/>

WOTTON, Sir Henry, ii. 170, n. 3.<br/>

WOTY, Mr., i. 382.<br/>

WRAXALL, Sir Nathaniel W.,<br/>

  George III's manners, ii. 40, n. 4;<br/>

  Johnson, describes, iii. 426, n. 4;<br/>

    and the Duchess of Devonshire, iii. 425, n. 4;<br/>

    and Mrs. Montagu, iv. 64, n. 1;<br/>

    meets, at Mrs. Vesey's, iii. 425;<br/>

    driven away by him, iii. 426, n. 4;<br/>

  Malagrida's name, iv. 174, n. 5;<br/>

  <i>Tour to the Northern Parts of Europe</i>, iii. 425.<br/>

WREN, Sir Christopher, v. 249.<br/>

WRIGHT, Thomas, of Shrewsbury, v. 455, n. 1.<br/>

WRITERS. See AUTHORS.<br/>

WRITING,<br/>

  Johnson's calculation about amount produced, ii. 344;<br/>

  money, for, iii. 19, 162;<br/>

  pleasure in it, iv. 219;<br/>

  writing from one's own mind, ii. 344.<br/>

<i>Wronghead, Sir Francis</i>, ii. 50.<br/>

WURTZBURG, Bishopric of, v. 46, n. 1.<br/>

WYCHERLY, William, definition of wit, iii. 23, n. 3.<br/>

WYNNE, Colonel, v. 449.<br/>

WYNNE, Sir Thomas and Lady, v. 448, 449.<br/>

WYNNE, Mrs., v. 451.<br/>
</p>

<h3>X.</h3>

<p>XAVIER, Francis, v. 392, n. 5.<br/>

XENOPHON,<br/>

  delineation of characters in the <i>Anabasis</i>, iv. 31;<br/>

  <i>Memorabilia</i>, iii. 367, w. 2; v. 414;<br/>

  <i>Treatise of Oeconomy</i>, iii. 94.<br/>

XERXES,<br/>

  described in Juvenal, ii. 228;<br/>

  weeping at seeing his army, iii. 199.<br/>

XYLANDER, i. 208, n. 1.<br/>
</p>

<h3>Y.</h3>

<p>YALDEN, Rev. Thomas,<br/>

  Johnson adds him to the <i>Lives</i>, iii. 370;<br/>

  his <i>Hymn to Darkness</i>, ib., n. 8.<br/>

YATES, Mr. Justice, i. 437, n. 2.<br/>

YAWNING, anecdote of, iii. 15.<br/>

YONGE, Sir William,<br/>

  character, i. 197, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Epilogue to Irene</i>, i. 197;<br/>

  pronunciation of <i>great</i>, ii. 161.<br/>

<i>Yorick's Sermons</i>, iv. 109, n. 1.<br/>

YORK, Address to the King, iv. 265; mentioned, iii. 439.<br/>

YORK, Archbishops of, their public dinners, iv. 367, n. 3.<br/>

  See MARKHAM, Archbishop.<br/>

YORK, Duke of (James II), v. 239, n. 1.<br/>

YORK, Duke of,<br/>

  goes to hear the Cock Lane ghost, i. 407, n. 1;<br/>

  Johnson dedicates music to him, ii. 2;<br/>

  kindness to Foote, iii. 97, n. 2.<br/>

YORK, House of, iii. 157.<br/>

YORKSHIRE, militia, i. 307, n. 4; iii. 362.<br/>

<i>You was</i>, iv. 196, n. 1.<br/>

YOUNG, Arthur,<br/>

  Birmingham manufacturers in 1768, ii. 459, n. 1;<br/>

  roads in the north of England, iii. 135, n. 1;<br/>

  mentioned, iii. 161, n. 2.<br/>

YOUNG, Dr. Edward,<br/>

  blank verse of <i>Night Thoughts</i>, iv. 42, n. 7, 60;<br/>

  Britannia's daughters and Bedlam, ii. 374, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Brunetta and Stella</i>, v. 270;<br/>

  <i>Card, The</i>, ridiculed in, v. 270, n. 4;<br/>

  Cheyne, Dr., iii. 27, n. 1;<br/>

  compared with Shakespeare and Dryden, ii. 86, n. 1;<br/>

  <i>Conjectures on Original Composition</i>, v. 269;<br/>

  critics, defies, ii. 61, n. 4;<br/>

  'death-bed a detector of the heart,' v. 397, n. 1;<br/>

  epigram on Lord Stanhope, iv. 102, n. 4;<br/>

  'For bankrupts write,' &amp;c., iii. 434, n. 6;<br/>

  gloomy, how far, iv. 59, 120;<br/>

  'Good breeding sends the satire,' &amp;c., iv. 298;<br/>

  housekeeper, his, v. 270;<br/>

  Johnson and Boswell visit his house, iv. 119-21;<br/>

  Johnson calls him 'a great man,' iv. 120;<br/>

    describes meeting him, v. 269;<br/>

    <i>Dictionary</i>, cited in, iv. 4, n. 3;<br/>

    estimate of his poetry, ii. 96; iv. 60; v. 269—70;<br/>

  knotting, on, iii. 242, n. 3;<br/>

  knowledge not great, v. 269, n. 3;<br/>

  Langton's account of him, iv. 59;<br/>

  <i>Life</i> by Croft, iv. 58; v. 270, n. 4;<br/>

  <i>Love of Fame</i>, v. 270;<br/>

  Mead, Dr., compliments, iii. 355, n. 2;<br/>

  <i>Night Thoughts</i>, ii. 96; iv. 60-1; v. 270;<br/>

  'Nor takes her tea,' &amp;c., iii. 324, n. 3;<br/>

  'O my coevals,' in. 307;<br/>

  preferment, pined for, iii. 251; iv. 121;<br/>

  quotations, iv. 102, n. 1;<br/>

  'quotidian prey,' v. 346;<br/>

  <i>Rambler</i>, his copy of the, i. 215;<br/>

  'Small sands the mountain,' &amp;c., iii. 164;<br/>

  sundial, iv. 60;<br/>

  <i>Universal Passion</i>,<br/>

    money received for it lost in the <i>South Sea</i>, iv. 121;<br/>

  'Words all in vain pant,' &amp;c., iv. 25, n. 3.<br/>

YOUNG, Mr. (Dr. Young's son),<br/>

  Boswell and Johnson visit him, iv. 119-21;<br/>

  quarrel with his father, v. 270.<br/>

YOUNG, Professor, of Glasgow, imitates Johnson's style, iv. 392.<br/>

YOUNG PEOPLE,<br/>

  generous sentiments, i. 445;<br/>

  Johnson loves their acquaintance, i. 445.<br/>

YOUTH,<br/>

  companions of our, iv. 147;<br/>

  scenes, i. 370; ii. 461, n. 1; v. 450.<br/>

<i>Yvery, History of the House of</i>, iv. 198.<br/>
</p>

<h3>Z.</h3>

<p>ZECK, George and Luke, ii. 7.<br/>

ZECKLERS, ii. 7 n. 3.<br/>

ZEILA, i. 88.<br/>

ZELIDE, ii. 56, n. 2.<br/>

ZENOBIA, ii. 127, n. 3.<br/>

<i>Zobeide</i>, iii. 38.<br/>

ZOFFANI, J., iv. 421, n. 2.<br/>

ZON, Mr., i. 274.<br/>

ZOZIMA, i. 223.<br/>
</p>

<h2>DICTA PHILOSOPHI.</h2>

<h5>A CONCORDANCE OF JOHNSON'S SAYINGS.</h5>

<p>ABANDON. 'Sir, a man might write such stuff for ever, if he would
abandon his mind to it,' iv. 183.</p>

<p>ABSTRACT. 'Why, Sir, he fancies so, because he is not accustomed
to abstract,' ii. 99.</p>

<p>ABSURD. 'When people see a man absurd in what they understand, they
may conclude the same of him in what they do not understand,' ii. 466.</p>

<p>ABUSE. 'Warburton, by extending his abuse, rendered it ineffectual,'<br/>

v. 93;<br/>

  'They may be invited on purpose to abuse him,' ii. 362;<br/>

  'You <i>may</i> abuse a tragedy, though you cannot write one,' i. 409.<br/>
</p>

<p>ACCELERATION. 'You cannot conceive with what acceleration I advance
towards death,' iv. 411.</p>

<p><i>Accommodé</i>. 'J'ai accommodé un dîner qui faisait trembler toute la
France' (recorded by Boswell), v. 310, n. 3.</p>

<p>ACTION. 'Action may augment noise, but it never can enforce
argument,' ii. 211.</p>

<p>ADMIRATION. 'Very near to admiration is the wish to admire,'
iii. 411, n. 2.</p>

<p>AGAIN. 'See him again' (Beauclerk), iv. 197.</p>

<p>ALIVE. 'Are we alive after all this satire?' iv. 29.</p>

<p>ALMANAC. 'Then, Sir, you would reduce all history to no better than
an almanac' (Boswell), ii. 366.</p>

<p>AMAZEMENT. 'His taste is amazement,' ii. 41, n. 1.</p>

<p>AMBASSADOR. 'The ambassador says well,' iii. 411.</p>

<p>AMBITION. 'Every man has some time in his life an ambition to be a
wag,' iv. 1, n. 2.</p>

<p>AMERICAN. 'I am willing to love all mankind, except an American,'
iii. 290.</p>

<p>AMUSEMENTS. 'I am a great friend to public amusements,' ii. 169.</p>

<p>ANCIENTS. 'The ancients endeavoured to make physic a science and
failed; and the moderns to make it a trade and have succeeded'
(Ballow), iii. 22, n. 4.</p>

<p>ANGRY. 'A man is loath to be angry at himself,' ii. 377.</p>

<p>ANTIQUARIAN. 'A mere antiquarian is a rugged being,' iii. 278.</p>

<p>APPLAUSE. 'The applause of a single human being is of great
consequence,' iv. 32.</p>

<p>ARGUES. 'He always gets the better when he argues alone' (Goldsmith),
ii. 236.</p>

<p>ARGUMENT. 'Sir, I have found you an argument, but I am not obliged<br/>

to find you an understanding,' iv. 313;<br/>

  'Nay, Sir, argument is argument,' iv. 281;<br/>

  'All argument is against it; but all belief is for it,' iii. 230;<br/>

  'Argument is like an arrow from a cross-bow' (Boyle), iv. 282.<br/>
</p>

<p>ASINUS. 'Plus negabit unus asinus in una hora quam centum philosophi
probaverint in centum annis,' ii. 268, n. 2.</p>

<p>ASPIRED. 'If he aspired to meanness his retrograde ambition was
completely gratified,' v. 148, n. 1.</p>

<p>ATHENIAN. 'An Athenian blockhead is the worst of all blockheads,' i. 73.</p>

<p>ATTACKED. 'I would rather be attacked than unnoticed,' iii. 375.</p>

<p>ATTENTION. 'He died of want of attention,' ii. 447.</p>

<p>ATTITUDENISE. 'Don't <i>attitudenise</i>,' iv. 323.</p>

<p>ATTORNEY. 'Now it is not necessary to know our thoughts to tell that
an attorney will sometimes do nothing,' iii. 297;
  'He did not care to speak ill of any man behind his back, but he
believed the gentleman was an attorney,' ii. 126.</p>

<p>AUCTION-ROOM. 'Just fit to stand at the door of an auction-room with a
long pole, and cry "Pray gentlemen, walk in,"' ii. 349.</p>

<p>AUDACITY. 'Stubborn audacity is the last refuge of guilt,' ii. 292, n. 1.</p>

<p>AUTHORS. 'Authors are like privateers, always fair game for one another,'<br/>

iv. 191, n. 1;<br/>

  'The chief glory of every people arises from its authors,' v. 137, n. 2.<br/>
</p>

<p>AVARICE. 'You despise a man for avarice, but do not hate him,' iii. 71.</p>

<h4>B.</h4>

<p>BABIES. 'Babies do not want to hear about babies,' iv. 8, n. 3.</p>

<p>BAITED. 'I will not be baited with <i>what</i> and <i>why</i>,' iii. 268.</p>

<p>BANDY. 'It was not for me to bandy civilities with my Sovereign,' ii. 35.</p>

<p>BARK. 'Let him come out as I do and bark,' iv. 161, n. 3.</p>

<p>BARREN. 'He was a barren rascal,' ii. 174.</p>

<p>BAWDY. 'A fellow who swore and talked bawdy,' ii. 64.</p>

<p>BAWDY-HOUSE. 'Sir, your wife, under pretence of keeping a bawdy-house,
is a receiver of stolen goods,' iv. 26.</p>

<p>BEAST. 'He who makes a beast of himself gets rid of the pain of being
a man,' ii. 435, n. 7.</p>

<p>BEAT. 'Why, Sir, I believe it is the first time he has <i>beat</i>; he may
have been <i>beaten</i> before,' ii. 210.</p>

<p>BEATEN. 'The more time is beaten, the less it is kept' (Rousseau), iv.
283, n. 1.</p>

<p>BELIEF. 'Every man who attacks my belief … makes me uneasy; and I
am angry with him who makes me uneasy,' iii. 10.</p>

<p>BELIEVE. 'We don't know <i>which</i> half to believe,' iv. 178.</p>

<p>BELL. 'It is enough for me to have rung the bell to him' (Burke), iv. 27.</p>

<p>BELLOWS. 'So many bellows have blown the fire, that one wonder she
is not by this time become a cinder,' ii. 227.</p>

<p>BELLY. 'I look upon it that he who does not mind his belly will hardly
mind anything else,' i. 467.</p>

<p>BENEFIT. 'When the public cares the thousandth part for you that it
does for her, I will go to your benefit too,' ii. 330.</p>

<p>BIG. 'Don't, Sir, accustom yourself to use big words for little
matters,' i. 471.</p>

<p>BIGOT. 'Sir, you are a bigot to laxness,' v. 120.</p>

<p>BISHOP. 'A bishop has nothing to do at a tippling-house,' iv. 75;<br/>

  'I should as soon think of contradicting a Bishop,' iv. 274;<br/>

  'Queen Elizabeth had learning enough to have given dignity to a<br/>

bishop,' iv. 13;<br/>

  'Dull enough to have been written by a bishop' (Foote), ib. n. 3.<br/>
</p>

<p>BLADE. 'A blade of grass is always a blade of grass,' v. 439, n. 2.</p>

<p>BLAZE. 'The blaze of reputation cannot be blown out, but it often
dies in the socket,' iii. 423.</p>

<p>BLEEDS. 'When a butcher tells you that his heart bleeds for his
country he has in fact no uneasy feeling,' i. 394.</p>

<p>BLOOM. 'It would have come out with more bloom if it had not been
seen before by anybody,' i. 185.</p>

<p>BLUNT. 'There is a blunt dignity about him on every occasion' (Sir<br/>

M. Le Fleming), i. 461, n. 4.<br/>
</p>

<p>BOARDS. 'The most vulgar ruffian that ever went upon <i>boards</i>'<br/>

(Garrick), ii. 465.<br/>
</p>

<p>BOLDER. 'Bolder words and more timorous meaning, I think, never
were brought together,' iv. 13.</p>

<p><i>Bon-mot</i>. 'It is not every man that can carry a <i>bon-mot</i>'
(Fitzherbert), ii. 350.</p>

<h5>BOOK. 'It was like leading one to talk of a book when the author is
concealed behind the door,' i. 396;
  'You have done a great thing when you have brought a boy to have
entertainment from a book,' iii. 385;
  'Read diligently the great book of mankind,' i. 464;
  'The parents buy the books, and the children never read them,'
iv. 8, n. 3;
  'The progress which the understanding makes through a book has more
pain than pleasure in it,' iv. 218;
  'It is the great excellence of a writer to put into his book as much
as his book will hold,' ii. 237.</h5>

<p>BOOKSELLER. 'An author generated by the corruption of a bookseller,'
iii. 434.</p>

<p>BORN. 'I know that he was born; no matter where,' v. 399.</p>

<p>BOTANIST. 'Should I wish to become a botanist, I must first turn
myself into a reptile,' i. 377, n. 2.</p>

<p>BOTTOM. 'A bottom of good sense,' iv. 99.</p>

<p>BOUNCING. 'It is the mere bouncing of a school-boy,' ii. 210.</p>

<p>BOUND. 'Not in a <i>bound</i> book,' iii. 319, n. 1.</p>

<p>BOW-WOW. 'Dr. Johnson's sayings would not appear so extraordinary
were it not for his bow-wow way' (Lord Pembroke), ii. 326, n. 5.</p>

<p>BRAINS. 'I am afraid there is more blood than brains,' iv. 20.</p>

<p>BRANDY. 'He who aspires to be a hero must drink brandy,' iii. 381;
  'Brandy will do soonest for a man what drinking can do for him,'
iii. 381.</p>

<p>BRASED. 'He advanced with his front already brased,' v. 388, n. 2.</p>

<p>BRAVERY. 'Bravery has no place where it can avail nothing,' iv. 395.</p>

<p>BRENTFORD. 'Pray, Sir, have you ever seen Brentford?' iv. 186.</p>

<p>BRIARS. 'I was born in the wilds of Christianity, and the briars and
thorns still hang about me' (Marshall), iii. 313.</p>

<p>BRIBED. 'You may be bribed by flattery,' v. 306.</p>

<p>BRINK. 'Dryden delighted to tread upon the brink of meaning,'
ii. 241, n. 1.</p>

<p>BROTHEL. 'This lady of yours, Sir, I think, is very fit for a
brothel,' iii. 25.</p>

<p>BRUTALITY. 'Abating his brutality he was a very good master,'
ii. 146.</p>

<p>BUCKRAM'D. 'It may have been written by Walpole and <i>buckram'd</i>
by Mason' (T. Warton), iv. 315.</p>

<p>BULL. 'If a bull could speak, he might as well exclaim, "Here am
I with this cow and this grass; what being can enjoy greater
felicity?"' ii. 228.</p>

<p>BULL'S HIDE. 'This sum will…get you a strong lasting coat supposing
it to be made of good bull's hide,' i. 440.</p>

<p>BURDEN. 'Poverty preserves him from sinking under the burden of
himself,' v. 358, n. 1.</p>

<p>BURROW. 'The chief advantage of London is that a man is always so
near his burrow' (Meynell), iii. 379.</p>

<p>BURSTS. 'He has no bursts of admiration on trivial occasions,' iv. 27</p>

<p>BUSINESS. 'It is prodigious the quantity of good that may be done by
one man, if he will make a business of it' (Franklin), iv. 97 n. 3.</p>

<p>Buz. 'That is the buz of the theatre,' v. 46.</p>

<h4>C.</h4>

<p>CABBAGE. 'Such a woman might be cut out of a cabbage, if there was
a skilful artificer,' v. 231.</p>

<p>CALCULATE. 'Nay, Madam, when you are declaiming, declaim; and
when you are calculating, calculate,' iii. 49.</p>

<p>CANDLES. 'A man who has candles may sit up too late,' ii. 188.</p>

<p>CANNISTER. 'An author hunted with a cannister at his tail,' iii. 320.</p>

<p>CANT. 'Clear your mind of cant,' iv. 221;<br/>

  'Don't cant in defence of savages,' iv. 308;<br/>

  'Vulgar cant against the manners of the great,' iii. 353.<br/>
</p>

<p>CANTING. 'A man who has been canting all his life may cant to the
last,' iii. 270.</p>

<p>CAPITULATE. 'I will be conquered, I will not capitulate,' iv. 374.</p>

<p>CARD-PLAYING. 'Why, Sir, as to the good or evil of card-playing,'<br/>

iii. 23;<br/>

  'It generates kindness and consolidates society,' v. 404.<br/>
</p>

<p>CARROT. 'You would not value the finest head cut upon a carrot,' ii.
439.</p>

<p>CAT. 'She was a speaking cat,' iii. 246.</p>

<p>CATCH. 'God will not take a catch of him,' iv. 225.</p>

<p>CATCHING. 'That man spent his life in catching at an object which he
had not power to grasp,' ii. 129.</p>

<p>CATEGORICAL. 'I could never persuade her to be categorical,' iii. 461.</p>

<p>CAUTION. 'A strain of cowardly caution,' iii. 210.</p>

<p>CAWMELL. 'Ay, ay, he has learnt this of Cawmell,' i. 418.</p>

<p>CENSURE. 'All censure of a man's self is oblique praise,' iii. 323.</p>

<p>CHAIR. 'He fills a chair,' iv. 81.</p>

<p>CHARACTER. 'Ranger is just a rake, a mere rake, and a lively young
fellow, but no <i>character</i> ii. 50;
  'Derrick may do very well as long as he can outrun his character, but
the moment his character gets up with him, it is all over,' i. 394;
  'The greater part of mankind have no character at all,' iii. 280, n. 3.</p>

<p>CHARITY. 'There is as much charity in helping a man down-hill as in
helping him up-hill,' v. 243.</p>

<p>CHEERFULNESS. 'Cheerfulness was always breaking in' (Edwards), iii. 305.</p>

<p>CHEQUERED. 'Thus life is chequered,' iv. 245, n. 2.</p>

<p>CHERRY-STONES. 'A genius that could not carve heads upon cherry-stones,'
iv. 305.</p>

<p>CHIEF. 'He has no more the soul of a chief than an attorney who has
twenty houses in a street, and considers how much he can make by
them,' v. 378.</p>

<p>CHILDISH. 'One may write things to a child without being childish'<br/>

(Swift), ii. 408, n. 3.<br/>
</p>

<p>CHIMNEY. 'To endeavour to make her ridiculous is like blacking the
chimney,' ii. 336.</p>

<p>CHUCK-FARTHING. 'A judge is not to play at marbles or at chuck-farthing
in the Piazza,' ii. 344.</p>

<p>CHURCH. 'He never passes a church without pulling off his hat,' i. 418;<br/>

'Let me see what was once a church,' v. 41.<br/>
</p>

<p>CITIZEN. 'The citizen's enlarged dinner, two pieces of roast-beef
and two puddings,' iii. 272.</p>

<p>CIVIL. 'He was so generally civil that nobody thanked him for it,'
iii. 183</p>

<p>CIVILITY. 'We have done with civility,' iii. 273.</p>

<p>CLAIMS. 'He fills weak heads with imaginary claims,' ii. 244.</p>

<p>CLAPPED. 'He could not conceive a more humiliating situation than to
be clapped on the back by Tom Davies' (Beauclerk), ii. 344.</p>

<p>CLARET. 'A man would be drowned by claret before it made him drunk,'<br/>

iii. 381; iv. 79;<br/>

'Claret is the liquor for boys,' iii. 381.<br/>
</p>

<p>CLEAN. 'He did not love clean linen; and I have no passion for
it,' i. 397.</p>

<p>CLEANEST. 'He was the cleanest-headed man that he had met with,'
v. 338.</p>

<p>CLERGYMAN. 'A clergyman's diligence always makes him venerable,'
iii. 438.</p>

<p>CLIPPERS. 'There are clippers abroad,' iii. 49.</p>

<p>COAT. 'A man who cannot get to heaven in a green coat will not
find his way thither the sooner in a grey one,' iii. 188, n. 4.</p>

<p>COCK. 'A fighting cock has a nobleness of resolution,' ii. 334.</p>

<p>COCK-FIGHTING. 'Cock-fighting will raise the spirits of a company,'
iii. 42.</p>

<p>COMBINATION. 'There is a combination in it of which Macaulay is
not capable,' v. 119.</p>

<p>COMEDY. 'I beg pardon, I thought it was a comedy' (Shelburne),<br/>

iv. 246, n. 5;<br/>

  'The great end of comedy is to make an audience merry,' ii. 233.<br/>
</p>

<p>COMMON—PLACES. 'Criticism disdains to chase a school-boy to his
common-places,' iv. 16, n. 4.</p>

<p>COMPANY. 'A fellow comes into <i>our</i> company who is fit for <i>no</i><br/>

company,' v. 312;<br/>

  'The servants seem as unfit to attend a company as to steer a<br/>

man of war,' iv. 312.<br/>
</p>

<p>COMPARATIVE. 'All barrenness is comparative,' iii. 76.</p>

<p>COMPLETES. 'He never completes what he has to say,' iii. 57.</p>

<p>CONCENTRATED. 'It is being concentrated which produces high
convenience,' v. 27.</p>

<p>CONCENTRATES. 'Depend upon it, Sir, when a man knows he is to be
hanged in a fortnight it concentrates his mind wonderfully,' iii. 167.</p>

<p>CONCLUSIVE. 'There is nothing conclusive in his talk,' iii. 57.</p>

<p>CONE. 'A country governed by a despot is an inverted cone,' iii. 283.</p>

<p>CONGRESS. 'If I had bestowed such an education on a daughter, and
had discovered that she thought of marrying such a fellow, I would
have sent her to the Congress,' ii. 409.</p>

<p>CONSCIENCE. 'No man's conscience can tell him the right of another
man,' ii. 243.</p>

<p>CONTEMPT. 'No man loves to be treated with contempt,' iii. 385.</p>

<p>CONTEMPTIBLE. 'There is no being so poor and so contemptible who
does not think there is somebody still poorer, and still more
contemptible,' ii. 13.</p>

<p>CONTRADICTED. 'What harm does it do to any man to be contradicted?'
iv. 280.</p>

<p>CONVERSATION. 'In conversation you never get a system,' ii. 361;<br/>

  'We had talk enough, but no conversation,' iv. 186.<br/>
</p>

<p>COUNT. 'He had to count ten, and he has counted it right,' ii. 65;
  'When the judgment is so disturbed that a man cannot count,
that is pretty well,' iv. 176.</p>

<p>COUNTING. 'A man is often as narrow as he is prodigal for want of
counting,' iv. 4, n. 4.</p>

<p>COUNTRY. 'They who are content to live in the country are fit for the
country,' iv. 338.</p>

<p>Cow. 'A cow is a very good animal in the field but we turn her out of<br/>

a garden,' ii. 187;<br/>

  'My dear Sir, I would confine myself to the cow' (Blair), v. 396, n. 4;<br/>

  'Nay, Sir, if you cannot talk better as a man, I'd have you bellow<br/>

like a cow,' v. 396.<br/>
</p>

<p>COWARDICE. 'Mutual cowardice keeps us in peace,' iii. 326;<br/>

  'Such is the cowardice of a commercial place,' iii. 429.<br/>
</p>

<p>COXCOMB. 'He is a coxcomb, but a satisfactory coxcomb'(Hamilton),<br/>

iii. 245, n. i;<br/>

  'Once a coxcomb and always a coxcomb,' ii. 129.<br/>
</p>

<p>CRAZY. 'Sir, there is no trusting to that crazy piety,' ii. 473.</p>

<p><i>Crédulité</i>. 'La Crédulité des incrédules' (Lord Hailes), v. 332.</p>

<p>CRITICISM. 'Blown about by every wind of criticism,' iv. 319.</p>

<p>CROSS-LEGGED. 'A tailor sits crosslegged, but that is not luxury,' ii. 218</p>

<p>CRUET. 'A mind as narrow as the neck of a vinegar cruet,' v. 269.</p>

<p><i>Cui bono</i>. 'I hate a <i>cui bono</i> man' (Dr. Shaw), iv. 112.</p>

<p>CURE. 'Stay till I am well, and then you shall tell me how to cure
myself,' ii. 260.</p>

<p>CURIOSITY. 'There are two objects of curiosity-the Christian world
and the Mahometan world,' iv. 199.</p>

<h4>D.</h4>

<p>DANCING-MASTER. 'They teach the morals of a whore and the manners
of a dancing-master,' i. 266.</p>

<p>DARING. 'These fellows want to say a daring thing, and don't know
how to go about it,' iii. 347.</p>

<p>DARKNESS. 'I was unwilling that he should leave the world in total
darkness, and sent him a set' [of the <i>Ramblers</i>], iv. 90.</p>

<p>DASH. 'Why don't you dash away like Burney?' ii. 409.</p>

<p>DEATH. 'If one was to think constantly of death, the business of<br/>

life would stand still,' v. 316;<br/>

  'The whole of life is but keeping away the thoughts of death,' ii. 93;<br/>

  'We are getting out of a state of death,' ii. 461;<br/>

  'Who can run the race with death?' iv. 360.<br/>
</p>

<p>DEBATE. 'When I was a boy I used always to choose the wrong side of
a debate,' i. 441.</p>

<p>DEBAUCH. 'I would not debauch her mind,' iv. 398, n. 2.</p>

<p>DEBAUCHED. 'Every human being whose mind is not debauched will
be willing to give all that he has to get knowledge,' i. 458.</p>

<p>DECLAIM. 'Nay, Madam, when you are declaiming, declaim; and when
you are calculating, calculate,' iii. 49.</p>

<p>DECLAMATION. 'Declamation roars and passion sleeps' (Garrick),
i. 199, n. 2.</p>

<p>DEFENSIVE. 'Mine was defensive pride,' i. 265.</p>

<p>DESCRIPTION. 'Description only excites curiosity; seeing satisfies
it,' iv. 199.</p>

<p><i>Desidiae</i>. '<i>Desidiae valedixi</i>,' i. 74.</p>

<p>DESPERATE. 'The desperate remedy of desperate distress,' i. 308, n. 1.</p>

<p>DEVIL. 'Let him go to some place where he is not known; don't let
him go to the devil where he is known,' v. 54.</p>

<p>DIE. 'I am not to lie down and die between them,' v. 47; 'It is a sad
thing for a man to lie down and die,' iii. 317;
  'To die with lingering anguish is generally man's folly,' iv. 150, n. 2.</p>

<p>DIES. 'It matters not how a man dies, but how he lives,' ii. 106.</p>

<p><i>Dieu</i>. '<i>Si Dieu n'existait pas, il faudrait l'inventer</i>'
(Voltaire), v. 47, n. 4.</p>

<p>DIFFERING. 'Differing from a man in doctrine was no reason why you
should pull his house about his ears,' v. 62.</p>

<p>DIGNITY. 'He that encroaches on another's dignity puts himself in his<br/>

power,' iv. 62;<br/>

  'The dignity of danger,' iii. 266.<br/>
</p>

<p>DINNER. 'A man seldom thinks with more earnestness of anything<br/>

than he does of his dinner,' i. 467, n. 2;<br/>

  'Amidst all these sorrowful scenes I have no objection to dinner,'<br/>

v. 63;<br/>

  'Dinner here is a thing to be first planned and then executed,'<br/>

v. 305;<br/>

  'This was a good enough dinner, to be sure; but it was not a<br/>

dinner to <i>ask</i> a man to,' i. 470.<br/>
</p>

<p>DIP. 'He had not far to dip,' iii. 35.</p>

<p>DIRT. 'By those who look close to the ground dirt will be seen,'
ii. 82, n. 3.</p>

<p>DISAPPOINTED. 'He had never been disappointed by anybody but himself,'
i. 337, n. 1.</p>

<p>DISCOURAGE. Don't let us discourage one another,' iii. 303.</p>

<p>DISLIKE. 'Nothing is more common than mutual dislike where mutual
approbation is particularly expected,' iii. 423.</p>

<p>DISPUTE. 'I will dispute very calmly upon the probability of another
man's son being hanged,' iii. 11.</p>

<p>DISSENTER. 'Sir, my neighbour is a Dissenter' (Sir R. Chambers), ii.
268, n. 2.</p>

<p>DISTANCE. 'Sir, it is surprising how people will go to a distance for
what they may have at home,' v. 286.</p>

<p>DISTANT. 'All distant power is bad,' iv. 213.</p>

<p>DISTINCTIONS. 'All distinctions are trifles,' iii. 355.</p>

<p>DISTRESS. 'People in distress never think that you feel enough,'
ii. 469.</p>

<p>DOCKER. 'I hate a Docker,' i. 379, n. 2.</p>

<p>DOCTOR. 'There goes the Doctor,' ii. 372.</p>

<p>DOCTRINE. 'His doctrine is the best limited,' iii. 338.</p>

<p>DOG. 'Ah, ah! Sam Johnson! I see thee!—and an ugly dog thou art,'<br/>

ii. 141, n. 2;<br/>

  'Does the dog talk of me?' ii. 53;<br/>

  '<i>He</i>, the little black dog,' i. 284;<br/>

  'He's a Whig, Sir; a sad dog,' iii. 274;<br/>

  'What he did for me he would have done for a dog,' iii. 195;<br/>

  'I have hurt the dog too much already,' i. 260, n. 3;<br/>

  'I hope they did not put the dog in the pillory,' iii. 354;<br/>

  'I love the young dogs of this age,' i. 445;<br/>

  'I took care that the Whig dogs should not have the best of it,'<br/>

i. 504;<br/>

  'I would have knocked the factious dogs on the head,' iv. 221;<br/>

  'If you were not an idle dog, you might write it,' iii. 162;<br/>

  'It is the old dog in a new doublet,' iii. 329;<br/>

  'Presto, you are, if possible, a more lazy dog than I am,'<br/>

iv. 347, n. 1;<br/>

  'Some dogs dance better than others,' ii. 404;<br/>

  'The dogs don't know how to write trifles with dignity,' iv. 34, n. 5;<br/>

  'The dogs are not so good scholars,' i. 445;<br/>

  'The dog is a Scotchman,' iv. 98;<br/>

  'The dog is a Whig,' v. 255;<br/>

  'The dog was so very comical,' iii. 69;<br/>

  'What, is it you, you dogs?' i. 250.<br/>
</p>

<p>DOGGED. 'Dogged veracity,' iii. 378.</p>

<p id="id01078" style="margin-left: 0%; margin-right: 0%">DOGGEDLY. 'A man may write at any time if he will set himself
 doggedly to it,' i. 203; v. 40, 110.</p>

<p>DOGMATISE. 'I dogmatise and am contradicted,' ii. 452, n. 1.</p>

<p>DONE. 'What a man has done compared with what he might have<br/>

done,' ii. 129;<br/>

  'What <i>must</i> be done, Sir, <i>will</i> be done,' i. 202.<br/>
</p>

<p>DOUBLE. 'It is not every name that can carry double,' v. 295;<br/>

  'Let us live double,' iv. 108.<br/>
</p>

<p>DOUBTS. 'His doubts are better than most people's certainties' (Lord<br/>

Chancellor Hardwicke), iii. 205.<br/>
</p>

<p>DRAW. 'Madam, I have but ninepence in ready money, but I can
draw for a thousand pounds' (Addison), ii. 256.</p>

<p>DRIFT. 'What is your drift, Sir?' iv. 281.</p>

<p>DRIVE. 'I do not now drive the world about; the world drives or
draws me,' iv. 273, n. 1;
  'If your company does not drive a man out of his house, nothing
will,' iii. 315;
  'Ten thousand Londoners would drive all the people of Pekin,'
v. 305.</p>

<p>DRIVING. 'You are driving rapidly <i>from</i> something, or <i>to</i> something,'
iii. 5.</p>

<p>DROPPED. 'There are people whom one should like very well to drop,
but would not wish to be dropped by,' iv. 73.</p>

<p>DROVES. 'Droves of them would come up, and attest anything for
the honour of Scotland,' ii. 311.</p>

<p>DROWNED. 'Being in a ship is being in a jail with the chance of being
drowned,' v. 137.</p>

<p>DRUNK. 'Never but when he is drunk,' ii. 351;<br/>

  'Equably drunk,' iii. 389;<br/>

  'People who died of dropsies, which they contracted in trying to<br/>

get drunk,' v. 249;<br/>

  'A man who exposes himself when he is intoxicated has not the art of<br/>

getting drunk,' iii. 389.<br/>
</p>

<p>DUCKING-STOOL. 'A ducking-stool for women,' iii. 287.</p>

<p>DULL. 'He is not only dull himself, but the cause of dulness in others'<br/>

(Foote), iv. 178;<br/>

  'He was dull in a new way,' ii. 327.<br/>
</p>

<p>DUNCE. 'It was worth while being a dunce then,' ii. 84;<br/>

  'Why that is because, dearest, you're a dunce,' iv. 109.<br/>
</p>

<h4>E.</h4>

<p>EARNEST. 'At seventy-seven it is time to be in earnest,' v. 288, n. 3.</p>

<p>EASIER. 'It is easier to write that book than to read it' (Goldsmith),<br/>

ii. 90;<br/>

  'It is much easier to say what it is not,' iii. 38.<br/>
</p>

<p>EAST. 'The man who has vigour may walk to the east just as well
as to the west, if he happens to turn his head that way,' v. 35.</p>

<p>ECONOMY. 'The blundering economy of a narrow understanding,' iii. 300.</p>

<p><i>Emptoris sit eligere</i>, i. 155.</p>

<p>EMPTY-HEADED. 'She does not gain upon me, Sir; I think her emptyheaded,'
iii. 48.</p>

<p>END. 'I am sure I am right, and there's an end on't' (Boswell in<br/>

imitation of Johnson), iii. 301;<br/>

'We know our will is free, and there's an end on't,' ii. 82;<br/>

'What the boys get at one end they lose at the other,' ii. 407.<br/>
</p>

<p>ENDLESS. 'Endless labour to be wrong,' iii. 158, n. 3.</p>

<p>ENGLAND. 'It is not so much to be lamented that Old England is lost,
as that the Scotch have found it,' iii. 78.</p>

<p>ENGLISHMAN. 'An Englishman is content to say nothing when he has<br/>

nothing to say,' iv. 15;<br/>

  'We value an Englishman highly in this country, and yet Englishmen<br/>

are not rare in it,' iii. 10.<br/>
</p>

<p>ENTHUSIAST. 'Sir, he is an enthusiast by rule,' iv. 33.</p>

<p>EPIGRAM. 'Why, Sir, he may not be a judge of an epigram; but you
see he is a judge of what is <i>not</i> an epigram,' iii. 259.</p>

<p><i>Esprit</i>. 'Il n'a de l'esprit que contre Dieu,' iii. 388.</p>

<p><i>Étudiez</i>. 'Ah, Monsieur, vous étudiez trop,' iv. 15.</p>

<p>EVERYTHING. 'A man may be so much of everything that he is nothing
of anything,' iv. 176.</p>

<p>EXCELLENCE. 'Compared with excellence, nothing,' iii. 320;<br/>

  'Is getting £100,000 a proof of excellence?' iii. 184.<br/>
</p>

<p>EXCESS. 'Such an excess of stupidity, Sir, is not in nature,' i. 453.</p>

<p>EXERCISE. 'He used for exercise to walk to the ale-house, but he was
carried back again,' i. 397;
  'I take the true definition of exercise to be labour without
weariness,' iv. 151, n. 1.</p>

<p>EXISTENCE. 'Every man is to take existence on the terms on which it
is given to him,' iii. 58.</p>

<h4>F.</h4>

<p>FACT. 'Housebreaking is a strong fact,' ii. 65.</p>

<p>FACTION. 'Dipped his pen in faction,' i. 375, n. 1.</p>

<p>FAGGOT. 'He takes its faggot of principles,' v. 36.</p>

<p>FALLIBLE. 'A fallible being will fail somewhere,' ii. 132.</p>

<p>FAME. 'Fame is a shuttlecock,' v. 400;<br/>

  'He had no fame but from boys who drank with him,' v. 268.<br/>
</p>

<p>FARTHING CANDLE. 'Sir, it is burning a farthing candle at Dover
to show light at Calais,' i. 454.</p>

<p>FAT. 'Who drives fat oxen should himself be fat,' iv. 313.</p>

<p>FEELING. 'They pay you by feeling,' ii. 95.</p>

<p>FEET. 'We grow to five feet pretty readily, but it is not so easy to
grow to seven,' iii. 316.</p>

<p>FELLOW. 'I look upon myself as a good-humoured fellow,' ii. 362;
  'When we see a very foolish <i>fellow</i> we don't know what to think
of <i>him</i>,' ii. 54.</p>

<p>FELLOWS. 'They are always telling lies of us old fellows,' iii. 303.</p>

<p>FIFTH. 'I heartily wish, Sir, that I were a fifth,' iv. 312.</p>

<p><i>Filosofo. 'Tu sei santo, ma tu non sei filosofo</i>' (Giannone), iv. 3.</p>

<p>FINE. 'Read over your compositions, and wherever you meet with a
passage which you think is particularly fine, strike it out' (a
college tutor), ii. 237;
  'Were I to have anything fine, it should be very fine,'
iv. 179; v. 364.</p>

<p>FINGERS. 'I e'en tasted Tom's fingers,' ii. 403.</p>

<p>FIRE. 'A man cannot make fire but in proportion as he has fuel,' &amp;c.,<br/>

v. 229;<br/>

  'If it were not for depriving the ladies of the fire I should like<br/>

to stand upon the hearth myself,' iv. 304, n. 4;<br/>

  'Would cry, Fire! Fire! in Noah's flood' (Butler), v. 57, n. 2.<br/>
</p>

<p>FISHES. 'If a man comes to look for fishes you cannot blame him
if he does not attend to fowls,' v. 221.</p>

<p>FLATTERERS. 'The fellow died merely from want of change among his
flatterers,' v. 396, n. 1.</p>

<p>FLATTERY. 'Dearest lady, consider with yourself what your flattery is
worth, before you bestow it so freely,' iv. 341.</p>

<p>FLEA. 'A flea has taken you such a time that a lion must have served
you a twelvemonth,' ii. 194;
  'There is no settling the point of precedency between a louse and a
flea,' iv. 193.</p>

<p>FLING. 'If I fling half a crown to a beggar with intention to break
his head,' &amp;c., i. 398.</p>

<p>FLOUNDERS. 'He flounders well,' v. 93, n. 1; 'Till he is at the
bottom he flounders,' v. 243.</p>

<p>FLY. 'A fly, Sir, may sting a stately horse and make him wince, but
one is but an insect, and the other is a horse still,' i. 263, n. 3.</p>

<p>FOLLY. 'There are in these verses too much folly for madness, and
too much madness for folly,' iii. 258, n. 2.</p>

<p>FOOL. 'I should never hear music, if it made me such a fool,' iii.<br/>

197;<br/>

  'There's danger in a fool' (Churchill), v. 217, n. 1.<br/>
</p>

<p>FOOLISH. 'I would almost be content to be as foolish,' iii. 21, n, 2;<br/>

  'It is a foolish thing well done,' ii. 210.<br/>
</p>

<p>FOOLS. 'I never desire to meet fools anywhere,' iii. 299, n. 2.</p>

<p>FOOTMAN. 'A well-behaved fellow citizen, your footman,' i. 447.</p>

<p>FOREIGNERS. 'For anything I see foreigners are fools'<br/>

('Old' Meynell), iv. 15.<br/>
</p>

<p>FORTUNE. 'It is gone into the city to look for a fortune,' ii. 126.</p>

<p>FORWARD. 'He carries you round and round without carrying you
forward to the point; but then you have no wish to be carried
forward,' iv. 48.</p>

<p>FOUR-PENCE. 'Garrick was bred in a family whose study was to make
four-pence do as much as others made fourpence halfpenny do,' iii.
387.</p>

<p>FRANCE. 'Will reduce us to babble a dialect of France,'
iii. 343, n. 3.</p>

<p>FRENCH. 'I think my French is as good as his English,' ii. 404.</p>

<p>FRENCHMAN. 'A Frenchman must be always talking, whether he
knows anything of the matter or not,' iv. 15.</p>

<p>FRIEND. 'A friend with whom they might compare minds, and cherish
private virtues,' iii. 387.</p>

<p>FRIENDSHIP. 'A man, Sir, should keep his friendship in constant
repair,' i. 300.</p>

<p>FRIENDSHIPS. 'Most friendships are formed by caprice or by
chance, mere confederacies in vice or leagues in folly,' iv. 280.</p>

<p>FRISK. 'I'll have a frisk with you,' i. 250.</p>

<p>FROTH. 'Longing to taste the froth from every stroke of the oar,'<br/>

 v. 440, n. 2.<br/>
</p>

<p>FROWN. 'On which side soever I turn, mortality presents its formidable
frown,' iv. 366.</p>

<p>FRUGAL. 'He was frugal by inclination, but liberal by principle,' iv.
62, n. 1.</p>

<p>FULL MEAL. 'Every man gets a little, but no man gets a full meal,'
ii. 363.</p>

<p>FUNDAMENTALLY. 'I say the woman was fundamentally sensible,' iv. 99.</p>

<p>FUTILE. 'Tis a futile fellow' (Garrick), ii. 326.</p>

<h4>G.</h4>

<p>GABBLE. 'Nay, if you are to bring in gabble I'll talk no more,' iii.
350.</p>

<p>GAIETY. 'Gaiety is a duty when health requires it,' iii. 136, n. 2.</p>

<p>GAOL. See SAILOR.</p>

<p>GAOLER. 'No man, now, has the same authority which his father had,
except a gaoler,' iii. 262.</p>

<p>GARRETS. 'Garrets filled with scribblers accustomed to lie,'
iii. 267, n. 1.</p>

<p>GENERAL. 'A man is to guard himself against taking a thing in
general,' iii. 8.</p>

<p>GENEROUS. 'I do not call a tree generous that sheds its fruit at
every breeze,' v. 400.</p>

<p>GENIUS. 'A man of genius has been seldom ruined but by himself,'
i. 381.</p>

<p>GENTEEL. 'No man can say "I'll be genteel,"' iii. 53.</p>

<p><i>Gentilhomme. 'Un gentilhomme est toujours gentilhomme</i>' (Boswell),
i. 492.</p>

<p>GENTLE. 'When you have said a man of gentle manners you have said
enough,' iv. 28.</p>

<p>GENTLEMAN. 'Don't you consider, Sir, that these are not the manners
of a gentleman?' iii. 268.</p>

<p>GEORGE. 'Tell the rest of that to George' (R. O. Cambridge), iv.
196, n. 3.</p>

<p>GHOST. 'If I did, I should frighten the ghost,' v. 38.</p>

<p>GLARE. 'Gave a distinguished glare to tyrannic rage' (Tom Davies), ii.
368, n. 3.</p>

<p>GLASSY. 'Glassy water, glassy water,' ii. 212, n. 4.</p>

<p>GLOOMY. 'Gloomy calm of idle vacancy,' i. 473.</p>

<p>GOD. 'I am glad that he thanks God for anything,' i. 287.</p>

<p>GOES ON. 'He goes on without knowing how he is to get off,' ii. 196.</p>

<p>GOOD. 'Sir, my being so <i>good</i> is no reason why you should be so <i>ill</i>,'
iii. 268; 'Everybody loves to have good things furnished to them,
without any trouble,' iv. 90;
  'I am ready now to call a man a good man upon easier terms than I was
formerly,' iv. 239;
  'A look that expressed that a good thing was coming,' iii. 425.</p>

<p>GRACES. 'Every man of any education would rather be called a rascal
than accused of deficiency in the graces,' iii. 54.</p>

<p>GRAND. 'Grand nonsense is insupportable,' i. 402.</p>

<p>GRATIFIED. 'Not highly <i>gratified</i>, yet I do not recollect to have
passed many evenings with <i>fewer objections</i>,' ii, 130.</p>

<p>GRAVE. 'We shall receive no letters in the grave,' iv. 413.</p>

<p>GRAZED. 'He is the richest author that ever grazed the common of
literature,' i. 418, n. 1.</p>

<p>GREAT. 'A man would never undertake great things could he be amused<br/>

with small,' iii. 242;<br/>

  'I am the great Twalmley,' iv. 193.<br/>
</p>

<p>GREYHOUND. 'He sprang up to look at his watch like a greyhound
bounding at a hare,' ii. 460.</p>

<p>GRIEF. 'All unnecessary grief is unwise,' iii. 136;<br/>

  'Grief has its time,' iv. 121;<br/>

  'Grief is a species of idleness,' iii. 136, n. 2.<br/>
</p>

<p>GUINEA. 'He values a new guinea more than an old friend,' v. 315;<br/>

'There go two and forty sixpences to one guinea,' ii. 201, n. 3.<br/>
</p>

<p>GUINEAS. 'He cannot coin guineas but in proportion as he has gold,'
v. 229.</p>

<h4>H.</h4>

<p>HANDS. 'A man cutting off his hands for fear he should steal,'
ii. 435;
  'I would rather trust my money to a man who has no hands, and
so a physical impossibility to steal, than to a man of the most
honest principles,' iv. 224.</p>

<p>HANGED. 'A friend hanged, and a cucumber pickled,' ii. 94;<br/>

  'Do you think that a man the night before he is to be hanged cares<br/>

for the succession of a royal family?' iii. 270;<br/>

  'He is not the less unwilling to be hanged,' iii. 295;<br/>

  'If he were once fairly hanged I should not suffer,' ii. 94;<br/>

  'No man is thought the worse of here whose brother was hanged,' ii.<br/>

177;<br/>

  'So does an account of the criminals hanged yesterday entertain<br/>

us,' iii. 318;<br/>

  'I will dispute very calmly upon the probability of another man's<br/>

son being hanged,' iii. 11;<br/>

  'You may as well ask if I hanged myself to-day,' iv. 173;<br/>

  'Depend upon it, Sir, when a man knows he is to be hanged in a<br/>

fortnight it concentrates his mind wonderfully,' iii. 167.<br/>
</p>

<p>HAPPINESS. 'These are only struggles for happiness,' iii. 199.</p>

<p>HAPPY. 'It is the business of a wise man to be happy,' iii. 135.</p>

<p>HARASSED. 'We have been harassed by invitations,' v. 395.</p>

<p>HARE. 'My compliments, and I'll dine with him, hare or rabbit,'
iii. 207.</p>

<p>HATE. 'Men hate more steadily than they love,' iii. 150.</p>

<p>HATER. 'He was a very good hater,' i. 190, n. 2.</p>

<p>HEAD. 'A man must have his head on something, small or great,' ii.
473, n. 1.</p>

<p>HEADACHE. 'At your age I had no headache,' i. 462;
  'Nay, Sir, it was not the wine that made your head ache, but the
sense that I put into it,' iii. 381.</p>

<p>HEAP. 'The mighty heap of human calamity,' iii. 289, n. 3.</p>

<p>HELL. 'Hell is paved with good intentions,' ii. 360.</p>

<p>HERMIT. 'Hermit hoar in solemn cell,' iii. 159.</p>

<p>HIDE. 'Exert your whole care to hide any fit of anxiety,' iii. 368.</p>

<p>HIGH. 'Here is a man six feet high and you are angry because he is
not seven,' v. 222.</p>

<p>HIGHLANDS. 'Who can like the Highlands?' v. 377.</p>

<p>HISS. Ah! Sir, a boy's being flogged is not so severe as a man's
having the hiss of the world against him,' i. 451.</p>

<p>HISTORIES. 'This is my history; like all other histories, a narrative
of misery,' iv. 362.</p>

<p>HOG. 'Yes, Sir, for a hog,' iv. 13.</p>

<p>HOGSTYE. 'He would tumble in a hogstye as long as you looked at him,
and called to him to come out,' i. 432.</p>

<p>HOLE. 'A man may hide his head in a hole … and then complain
he is neglected,' iv. 172.</p>

<p>HONESTLY. 'I who have eaten his bread will not give him to him;
but I should be glad he came honestly by him,' v. 277.</p>

<p><i>Honores. 'Honores mutant mores</i>' iv. 130.</p>

<p>HONOUR. 'If you do not see the honour, I am sure I feel the disgrace'
(fathered on Johnson), iv. 342.</p>

<p>HOOKS. 'He has not indeed many hooks; but with what hooks he
has, he grapples very forcibly,' ii. 57.</p>

<p>HOPE. 'He fed you with a continual renovation of hope to end in
a constant succession of disappointment,' ii. 122.</p>

<p>HOTTENTOT. 'Sir, you know no more of our Church than a Hottentot,'
v. 382.</p>

<p>HOUSEWIFERY. 'The fury of housewifery will soon subside,' iv. 85, n. 2.</p>

<p>HUGGED. 'Had I known that he loved rhyme as much as you tell
me he does, I should have hugged him,' i. 427.</p>

<p>HUMANITY. 'We as yet do not enough understand the common
rights of humanity,' iv. 191, 284.</p>

<p>HUNG. 'Sir, he lived in London, and hung loose upon Society,' i. 226.</p>

<p>HUNTED. 'Am I to be hunted in this manner?' iv. 170.</p>

<p>HURT. 'You are to a certain degree hurt by knowing that even
one man does not believe,' iii. 380.</p>

<p>HYPOCRISY. 'I hoped you had got rid of all this hypocrisy of
misery,' iv. 71.</p>

<p>HYPOCRITE. 'No man is a hypocrite in his pleasures,' iv. 316.</p>

<h4>I.</h4>

<p>I. 'I put my hat upon my head,' ii. 136, n. 4.</p>

<p>IDEA. 'That fellow seems to me to possess but one idea, and that
is a wrong one,' ii. 126;
  'There is never one idea by the side of another,' iv. 225.</p>

<p>IDLE. 'If we were all idle, there would be no growing weary,' ii. 98;<br/>

  'We would all be idle if we could,' iii. 13.<br/>
</p>

<p>IDLENESS. 'I would rather trust his idleness than his fraud,' v. 263.</p>

<p>IGNORANCE. 'A man may choose whether he will have abstemiousness<br/>

and knowledge, or claret and ignorance,' iii. 335;<br/>

  'He did not know enough of Greek to be sensible of his ignorance<br/>

of the language,' iv. 33, n. 3;<br/>

  'His ignorance is so great I am afraid to show him the bottom of<br/>

it,' iv. 33, n. 3<br/>

  'Ignorance, Madam, pure ignorance,' i. 293;<br/>

  'Sir, you talk the language of ignorance,' ii. 122.<br/>
</p>

<p>IGNORANT. 'The ignorant are always trying to be cunning,' v.<br/>

217, n. 1;<br/>

  'We believe men ignorant till we know that they are learned,'<br/>

v. 253.<br/>
</p>

<p>ILL. 'A man could not write so ill if he should try,' iii. 243.</p>

<p>ILL-FED. 'It is as bad as bad can be; it is ill-fed, ill-killed,
ill-kept and ill-drest,' iv. 284.</p>

<p>IMAGERY. 'He that courts his mistress with Roman imagery deserves
to lose her,' v. 268, n. 2.</p>

<p>IMAGINATION. 'There is in them what <i>was</i> imagination,' i. 421;
  'This is only a disordered imagination taking a different turn,'
iii. 158.</p>

<p>IMMORTALITY. 'If it were not for the notion of immortality he would
cut a throat to fill his pockets,' ii. 359.</p>

<p>IMPARTIAL. 'Foote is quite impartial, for he tells lies of everybody,'
ii. 434.</p>

<p>IMPORTS. 'Let your imports be more than your exports, and you'll
never go far wrong,' iv. 226.</p>

<p>IMPOSSIBLE. 'That may be, Sir, but it is impossible for you to
know it,' ii. 466, n. 3;
  'I would it had been impossible,' ii. 409, n. 1.</p>

<p>IMPOTENCE. 'He is narrow, not so much from avarice as from impotence
to spend his money,' iii. 40.</p>

<p>IMPRESSIONS. 'Do not accustom yourself to trust to impressions,'
iv. 122.</p>

<p>IMPUDENCE. 'An instance how far impudence could carry ignorance,'
iii. 390.</p>

<p>INCOMPRESSIBLE. 'Foote is the most incompressible fellow that I
ever knew,' &amp;c., v. 391.</p>

<p>INDIA. 'Nay, don't give us India,' v. 209.</p>

<p>INEBRIATION. 'He is without skill in inebriation,' iii. 389.</p>

<p>INFERIOR. 'To an inferior it is oppressive; to a superior it is
insolent,' v. 73.</p>

<p>INFERIORITY. 'There is half a guinea's worth of inferiority to
other people in not having seen it,' ii. 169.</p>

<p>INFIDEL. 'If he be an infidel he is an infidel as a dog is an infidel,'<br/>

ii. 95;<br/>

  'Shunning an infidel to-day and getting drunk to-morrow' (A<br/>

celebrated friend), iii. 410.<br/>
</p>

<p>INGRAT. 'Je fais cent mécontens et un ingrat' (Voltaire), ii. 167,
n. 3.</p>

<p>INNOVATION. 'Tyburn itself is not safe from the fury of innovation,'
iv. 188.</p>

<p>INSIGNIFICANCE. 'They will be tamed into insignificance,' v. 148, n. 1.</p>

<p>INSOLENCE. 'Sir, the insolence of wealth will creep out,' iii. 316.</p>

<p>INTENTION. 'We cannot prove any man's intention to be bad,' ii. 12.</p>

<p>INTREPIDITY. 'He has an intrepidity of talk, whether he understands
the subject or not,' v. 330.</p>

<p>INVERTED. 'Sir, he has the most <i>inverted</i> understanding of any man
whom I have ever known,' iii. 379.</p>

<p>IRONS. 'The best thing I can advise you to do is to put your
tragedy along with your irons,' iii. 259, n. 1.</p>

<p>IRRESISTIBLY. 'No man believes himself to be impelled irresistibly,'
iv. 123.</p>

<p>IT. 'It is not so. Do not tell this again,' iii. 229.</p>

<h4>J.</h4>

<p>JACK. 'If a jack is seen, a spit will be presumed,' ii. 215, n. 4;
iii. 461.</p>

<p>JACK KETCH. 'Dine with Jack Wilkes, Sir! I'd as soon dine with<br/>

Jack Ketch' (Boswell), iii. 66.<br/>
</p>

<p>JEALOUS. 'Little people are apt to be jealous,' iii. 55.</p>

<p>JOKE. 'I may be cracking my joke, and cursing the sun,' iv. 304.</p>

<p>JOKES. 'A game of jokes is composed partly of skill, partly of
chance,' ii. 231.</p>

<p>JOSTLE. 'Yes, Sir, if it were necessary to jostle him <i>down</i>,' ii. 443.</p>

<p>JOSTLED. 'After we had been jostled into conversation,' iv. 48, n. 1.</p>

<p>JUDGE. 'A judge may be a farmer; but he is not to geld his own pigs,'
ii. 344.</p>

<p>JURY. 'Consider, Sir, how should you like, though conscious of your
innocence, to be tried before a jury for a capital crime once a
week,' iii. 11.</p>

<h4>K.</h4>

<p>KEEP. 'You <i>have</i> Lord Kames, keep him,' ii. 53.</p>

<p>KINDNESS. 'Always, Sir, set a high value on spontaneous kindness,'<br/>

iv. 115;<br/>

  'To cultivate kindness is a valuable part of the business of<br/>

life,' iii. 182.<br/>
</p>

<p>KNEW. 'George the First knew nothing and desired to know nothing;
did nothing, and desired to do nothing,' ii. 342.</p>

<p>KNOCKED. 'He should write so as he may <i>live</i> by them, not so as he
may be knocked on the head,' ii. 221.</p>

<p>KNOWING. 'It is a pity he is not knowing,' ii. 196.</p>

<p>KNOWLEDGE. 'A desire of knowledge is the natural feeling of mankind,'<br/>

i. 458;<br/>

  'A man must carry knowledge with him, if he would bring home<br/>

knowledge,' iii. 302.<br/>
</p>

<h4>L.</h4>

<p>LABOUR. 'It appears to me that I labour when I say a good thing,'<br/>

iii. 260; v. 77;<br/>

  'No man loves labour for itself,' ii. 99.<br/>
</p>

<p>LACE. 'Let us not be found, when our Master calls us, ripping the
lace off our waistcoats, but the spirit of contention from our souls
and tongues,' iii. 188, n. 4.</p>

<p>LACED COAT. 'One loves a plain coat, another loves a laced coat,'
ii. 192.</p>

<p>LACED WAISTCOAT. If everybody had laced waistcoats we should
have people working in laced waistcoats,' ii. 188.</p>

<p><i>Laetus. 'Aliis laetus, sapiens sibi</i>,' iii. 405.</p>

<p>LANGUAGES. 'Languages are the pedigree of nations,' v. 225.</p>

<p>LATIN. 'He finds out the Latin by the meaning, rather than the
meaning by the Latin,' ii. 377.</p>

<p>LAWYERS. 'A bookish man should always have lawyers to converse
with,' iii. 306.</p>

<p>LAY. 'Lay your knife and your fork across your plate,' ii. 51.</p>

<p>LAY OUT. 'Sir, you cannot give me an instance of any man who is
permitted to lay out his own time contriving not to have tedious
hours,' ii. 194.</p>

<p>LEAN. 'Every heart must lean to somebody,' i. 515.</p>

<p>LEARNING. 'He had no more learning than what he could not help,'<br/>

iii. 386;<br/>

  'I am always for getting a boy forward in his learning,' iii. 385;<br/>

  'I never frighten young people with difficulties [as to learning],'<br/>

v. 316;<br/>

  'Their learning is like bread in a besieged town; every man gets<br/>

a little, but no man gets a full meal,' ii. 363.<br/>
</p>

<p>LEGS. 'Sir, it is no matter what you teach them first, any more than<br/>

what leg you shall put into your breeches first,' i. 452;<br/>

  'A man who loves to fold his legs and have out his talk,' iii. 230;<br/>

  'His two legs brought him to that,' v. 397.<br/>
</p>

<p>LEISURE. 'If you are sick, you are sick of leisure,' iv. 352.</p>

<p>LEVELLERS. 'Your levellers wish to level <i>down</i> as far as themselves;
but they cannot bear levelling <i>up</i> to themselves,' i. 448.</p>

<p>LEXICOGRAPHER. 'These were the dreams of a poet doomed at last
to wake a lexicographer,' v. 47, n. 2.</p>

<p>LIAR. 'The greatest liar tells more truth than falsehood,' iii. 236.</p>

<p>LIBEL. 'Boswell's <i>Life of Johnson</i> is a new kind of libel'<br/>

(Dr. Blagden), iv. 30, n. 2.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Liber. 'Liber ut esse velim,</i>' &amp;c., i. 83, n. 3.</p>

<p>LIBERTY. 'All <i>boys</i> love liberty,' iii. 383;<br/>

  'I am at liberty to walk into the Thames,' iii. 287;<br/>

  'Liberty is as ridiculous in his mouth as religion in mine' (Wilkes),<br/>

iii. 224;<br/>

  'No man was at liberty not to have candles in his windows,' iii. 383;<br/>

  'People confound liberty of thinking with liberty of talking,' ii. 249.<br/>
</p>

<p>LIBRARIES, 'A robust genius born to grapple with whole libraries'<br/>

(Dr. Boswell), iii. 7.<br/>
</p>

<p>LIE. 'Do the devils lie? No; for then Hell could not subsist'<br/>

(attributed to Sir Thomas Browne), iii. 293;<br/>

  'He carries out one lie; we know not how many he brings<br/>

back,' iv. 320;<br/>

  'If I accustom a servant to tell a lie for <i>me</i>, have I not reason<br/>

to apprehend that he will tell many lies for himself?' i. 436;<br/>

  'Sir, If you don't lie, you are a rascal' (Colman), iv. 10;<br/>

  'It is only a wandering lie,' iv. 49, n. 3;<br/>

  'It requires no extraordinary talents to lie and deceive,' v. 217;<br/>

  'Never lie in your prayers' (Jeremy Taylor), iv. 295.<br/>
</p>

<p>LIED. 'Why, Sir, I do not know that Campbell ever lied with pen
and ink,' iii. 244.</p>

<p>LIES. 'Campbell will lie, but he never lies on paper,' i. 417, n. 5;<br/>

  'Knowing as you do the disposition of your countrymen to tell<br/>

lies in favour of each other,' ii. 296;<br/>

  'He lies and he knows he lies,' iv. 49;<br/>

  'The man who says so lies,' iv. 273;<br/>

  'There are inexcusable lies and consecrated lies,' i. 355.<br/>
</p>

<p>LIFE. 'A great city is the school for studying life,' iii. 253;<br/>

  'His life was marred by drink and insolence,' iv. 161, n. 4;<br/>

  'It is driving on the system of life,' iv. 112;<br/>

  'Life stands suspended and motionless,' iii. 419;<br/>

  'The tide of life has driven us different ways,' iii. 22.<br/>
</p>

<p>LIGHTS. 'Let us have some more of your northern lights; these are
mere farthing candles,' v. 57, n. 3.</p>

<p>LIMBS. 'The limbs will quiver and move when the soul is gone,' iii.
38, n. 6.</p>

<p>LINK. 'Nay. Sir, don't you perceive that <i>one</i> link cannot clank,'
iv. 317.</p>

<p>LITTLE. 'It must be born with a man to be contented to take up
with little things,' iii. 241.</p>

<p>LOCALLY. 'He is only locally at rest,' iii. 241.</p>

<p>LONDON. 'A London morning does not go with the sun,' iv. 72;<br/>

  'When a man is tired of London he is tired of life,' iii. 178.<br/>
</p>

<p>LORD. 'His parts, Sir, are pretty well for a Lord,' iii. 35;<br/>

  'Great lords and great ladies don't love to have their mouths<br/>

stopped,' iv. 116;<br/>

  'A wit among Lords': See below, WITS.<br/>
</p>

<p>LOUSE. See above, FLEA.</p>

<p>LOVE. 'It is commonly a weak man who marries for love,' iii. 3;<br/>

  'Sir, I love Robertson, and I won't talk of his book,' ii. 53;<br/>

  'You all pretend to love me, but you do not love me so well as<br/>

I myself do,' iv. 399, n. 6.<br/>
</p>

<p>LUXURY. 'No nation was ever hurt by luxury,' ii. 218.</p>

<p>LYING. 'By his lying we lose not only our reverence for him, but
all comfort in his conversation,' iv. 178.</p>

<h4>M.</h4>

<p>MACHINE. 'If a man would rather be the machine I cannot argue with
him,' v. 117.</p>

<p>MADE DISH. 'As for Maclaurin's imitation of a made dish, it was
a wretched attempt,' i. 469.</p>

<p>MADHOUSES. 'If you should search all the madhouses in England, you
would not find ten men who would write so, and think it sense,' iv.
170.</p>

<p>MADNESS. 'With some people gloomy penitence is only madness
turned upside down,' iii. 27.</p>

<p>MANKIND. 'As I know more of mankind I expect less of them,' iv. 239.</p>

<p>MANY. 'Yes, Sir, many men, many women, and many children,' i. 396.</p>

<p>MARKET. 'A horse that is brought to market may not be bought,
though he is a very good horse,' iv. 172;
  'Let her carry her praise to a better market,' iii. 293.</p>

<p>MARTYRDOM. 'Martyrdom is the test,' iv. 12.</p>

<p>MAST. 'A man had better work his way before the mast than read
them through,' iv. 308.</p>

<p>MEAL. 'He takes more corn than he can make into meal,' iv. 98.</p>

<p>MEANLY. 'Every man thinks meanly of himself for not having been a
soldier, or not having been at sea,' iii. 265.</p>

<p>MEMORY. 'The true art of memory is the art of attention,' iv. 126,
n. 6.</p>

<p>MEN. 'Johnson was willing to take men as they are' (Boswell), iii. 282.</p>

<p>MERCHANT. 'An English Merchant is a new species of gentleman,' i.
491, n. 3.</p>

<p>MERIT. 'Like all other men who have great friends, you begin to
feel the pangs of neglected merit,' iv. 248.</p>

<p>MERRIMENT. 'It would be as wild in him to come into company without
merriment, as for a highwayman to take the road without his
pistols,' iii. 389.</p>

<p>MIGHTY. 'There is nothing in this mighty misfortune,' i. 422.</p>

<p>MILK. 'They are gone to milk the bull,' i. 444.</p>

<p>MILLIONS. 'The interest of millions must ever prevail over that of
thousands,' ii. 127.</p>

<p>MIND. 'A man loves to review his own mind,' iii. 228;<br/>

  'Get as much force of mind as you can,' iv. 226;<br/>

'He fairly puts his mind to yours,' iv. 179;<br/>

  'The true, strong, and sound mind is the mind that can embrace<br/>

equally great things and small,' iii. 334;<br/>

  'They had mingled minds,' iv. 308;<br/>

  'To have the management of the mind is a great art,' ii. 440.<br/>
</p>

<p>MISER. 'He has not learnt to be a miser,' v. 316.</p>

<p>MISERY. 'It would be misery to no purpose,' ii. 94;
  'Where there is nothing but pure misery, there never is any recourse
to the mention of it,' iv. 31.</p>

<p>MISFORTUNES. 'If a man <i>talks</i> of his misfortunes, there is something
in them that is not disagreeable to him,' iv. 31.</p>

<p>MISS. 'Very well for a young Miss's verses,' iii. 319.</p>

<p>MONARCHY. 'You are for making a monarchy of what should be a
a republic' (Goldsmith), ii. 257.</p>

<p>MONEY. 'Getting money is not all a man's business,' iii. 182;<br/>

  'No man but a blockhead ever wrote except for money,' iii. 19;<br/>

  '<i>Perhaps</i> the money might be <i>found</i>, and he was <i>sure</i> that<br/>

his wife was <i>gone</i>,' iv. 319;<br/>

  'There are few ways in which a man can be more innocently employed<br/>

than in getting money,' ii. 323;<br/>

  'You must compute what you give for money,' iii. 400.<br/>
</p>

<p>MONUMENT, 'Like the Monument,' i. 199.</p>

<p>MOUTH. 'He could not mouth and strut as he used to do, after having
been in the pillory,' iii. 315.</p>

<p>MOVE. 'When I am to move, there is no matter which leg I move first,'
ii. 230.</p>

<p>MUDDY. 'He is a very pious man, but he is always muddy,' ii. 460.</p>

<p>MURDER. 'He practised medicine by chance, and grew wise only by
murder,' v. 93, n. 4.</p>

<h4>N.</h4>

<p>NAMES. 'I do not know which of them calls names best,' ii. 37;<br/>

  'The names carry the poet, not the poet the names,' iii. 318.<br/>
</p>

<p>NAP. 'I never take a nap after dinner, but when I have had a
bad night, and then the nap takes me,' ii. 407.</p>

<p>NARROWNESS. 'Occasionally troubled with a fit of narrowness'<br/>

(Boswell), iv. 191.<br/>
</p>

<p>NATION. 'The true state of every nation is the state of common life,'
v. 109, n. 6.</p>

<p>NATIONAL. 'National faith is not yet sunk so low,' iv. 21.</p>

<p>NATIVE PLACE. 'Every man has a lurking wish to appear considerable
in his native place,' ii. 141.</p>

<p>NATURE. 'All the rougher powers of nature except thunder were in
motion,' iii. 455;
  'You are so grossly ignorant of human nature as not to know that
a man may be very sincere in good principles without having good
practice,' v. 359;
  'Nature will rise up, and, claiming her original rights, overturn
a corrupt political system,' i. 424.</p>

<p>NECESSITY. 'As to the doctrine of necessity, no man believes it,'
iv. 329.</p>

<p>NECK. 'He gart Kings ken that they had a <i>lith</i> in their neck'
(Lord Auchinleck), v. 382, n. 2;
  'On a thirtieth of January every King in Europe would rise with a
crick in his neck' (Quin), v. 382, n. 2;
  'If you have so many things that will break, you had better
break your neck at once, and there's an end on't,' iii. 153.</p>

<p>NEGATIVE. 'She was as bad as negative badness could be,' v. 231.</p>

<p>NEVER. 'Never try to have a thing merely to show that you cannot
have it,' iv. 205.</p>

<p>NEW. 'I found that generally what was new was false' (Goldsmith),
iii. 376.</p>

<p>NEWSPAPERS. 'They have a trick of putting everything into the
newspapers,' iii. 330.</p>

<p>NICHOLSON. 'My name might originally have been Nicholson,' i. 439.</p>

<p>NINEPENCE. See DRAW.</p>

<p>No. 'No tenth transmitter of a foolish face' (Savage), i. 166.</p>

<p>NON-ENTITY. 'A man degrading himself to a non-entity,' v. 277.</p>

<p>NONSENSE. 'A man who talks nonsense so well must know that he
is talking nonsense,' ii. 74;
  'Nonsense can be defended but by nonsense,' ii. 78.</p>

<p>NOSE. 'He may then go and take the King of Prussia by the nose,
at the head of his army,' ii. 229.</p>

<p>NOTHING. 'Rather to do nothing than to do good is the lowest state
of a degraded mind,' iv. 352;
  'Sir Thomas civil, his lady nothing,' v. 449.</p>

<p>NOVELTIES. 'This is a day of novelties,' v. 120.</p>

<p>NURSE. 'There is nothing against which an old man should be so
much upon his guard as putting himself to nurse,' ii. 474.</p>

<h4>O.</h4>

<p>OBJECT. 'Nay, Sir, if you are born to object I have done with you,' v.
151.</p>

<p>OBJECTIONS. 'So many objections might be made to everything, that<br/>

nothing could overcome them but the necessity of doing something,'<br/>

ii. 128;<br/>

  'There is no end of objections,' iii. 26.<br/>
</p>

<p>OBLIVION. 'That was a morbid oblivion,' v. 68.</p>

<p>ODD. 'Nothing odd will do long,' ii. 449.</p>

<p>ON'T. 'I'll have no more on't,' iv. 300.</p>

<p>OPPRESSION. 'Unnecessarily to obtrude unpleasing ideas is a species
of oppression,' v. 82, n. 2.</p>

<p>ORCHARD. 'If I come to an orchard,' &amp;c., ii. 96.</p>

<p>OUT. 'A man does not love to go to a place from whence he comes
out exactly as he went in,' iv. 90.</p>

<p>OUTLAW. 'Sir, he leads the life of an outlaw,' ii. 375.</p>

<p>OUT-VOTE. 'Though we cannot out-vote them we will out-argue them,'
iii. 234.</p>

<p>OVERFLOWED. 'The conversation overflowed and drowned him,' ii. 122.</p>

<p>OWL. 'Placing a timid boy at a public school is forcing an owl
upon day,' iv. 312.</p>

<h4>P.</h4>

<p>PACKHORSE. 'A carrier who has driven a packhorse,' &amp;c., v. 395.</p>

<p>PACKTHREAD. 'When I take up the end of a web, and find it packthread,<br/>

I do not expect, by looking further, to find embroidery,' ii. 88.<br/>
</p>

<p>PACTOLUS. 'Sir, had you been dipt in Pactolus, I should not have
noticed you,' iv. 320.</p>

<p>PAIN. 'He who makes a beast of himself gets rid of the pain of being
a man,' ii. 435, n. 7.</p>

<p>PAINTED. 'Hailes's <i>Annals of Scotland</i> have not that painted form
which is the taste of this age,' iii. 58.</p>

<p>PAINTING. 'Painting, Sir, can illustrate, but cannot inform,' iv. 321.</p>

<p>PALACES. 'We are not to blow up half a dozen palaces because one
cottage is burning,' ii. 90.</p>

<p>PAMPER. 'No, no, Sir; we must not <i>pamper</i> them,' iv. 133.</p>

<p>PANT. 'Prosaical rogues! next time I write, I'll make both time and
space pant,' iv. 25.</p>

<p>PARADOX. 'No, Sir, you are not to talk such paradox,' ii. 73.</p>

<p>PARCEL. 'We are not here to sell a parcel of boilers and vats, but
the potentiality of growing rich beyond the dreams of avarice'
(Lord Lucan's anecdote of Johnson), iv. 87.</p>

<p>PARENTS. 'Parents not in any other respect to be numbered with robbers
and assassins,' &amp;c., iii. 377, n. 3.</p>

<p>PARNASSUS. See CRITICISM.</p>

<p>PARSIMONY. 'He has the crime of prodigality and the wretchedness
of parsimony,' iii. 317.</p>

<p>PARSONS. 'This merriment of parsons is mighty offensive,' iv. 76.</p>

<p>PATRIOTISM. 'Patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel,' ii. 348.</p>

<p>PATRIOTS. 'Patriots spring up like mushrooms' (Sir R. Walpole), iv.<br/>

87, n. 2;<br/>

  'Don't let them be patriots,' iv. 87.<br/>
</p>

<p>PATRON. 'The Patron and the jail,' i. 264.</p>

<p>PECCANT. 'Be sure that the steam be directed to thy <i>head,</i> for
<i>that</i> is the <i>peccant</i> part,' ii. 100.</p>

<p>PEGGY. 'I cannot be worse, and so I'll e'en take Peggy,' ii. 101.</p>

<p>PELTING. 'No, Sir, if they had wit they should have kept pelting me
with pamphlets,' ii. 308.</p>

<p>PEN. 'No man was more foolish when he had not a pen in his hand,
or more wise when he had,' iv. 29.</p>

<p>PEOPLE. 'The lairds, instead of improving their country, diminished
their people,' v. 300.</p>

<p>Per. <i>'Per mantes notos et flumina nota,'</i> i. 49, n. 4; v. 456, n. 1.</p>

<p>PERFECT. 'Endeavour to be as perfect as you can in every respect,'
iv. 338.</p>

<p>PERISH. 'Let the authority of the English government perish rather
than be maintained by iniquity,' ii. 121.</p>

<p>PETTY. 'These are the petty criticisms of petty wits,' i. 498.</p>

<p>PHILOSOPHER. 'I have tried in my time to be a philosopher; but I
don't know how, cheerfulness was always breaking in' (O. Edwards),
iii. 305.</p>

<p>PHILOSOPHICAL. 'We may suppose a philosophical day-labourer,….
but we find no such philosophical day-labourer,' v. 328.</p>

<p><i>Philosophus. 'Magis philosophus quam Christianus,'</i> ii. 127.</p>

<p>PHILOSOPHY. 'It seems to be part of the despicable philosophy of the
time to despise monuments of sacred magnificence,' v. 114, n. 1.</p>

<p>PICTURE. 'Sir, among the anfractuosities of the human mind I know
not if it may not be one, that there is a superstitious reluctance
to sit for a picture,' iv. 4.</p>

<p>PIETY. 'A wicked fellow is the most pious when he takes to it. He'll
beat you all at piety,' iv. 289.</p>

<p>PIG. 'Pig has, it seems, not been wanting to man, but man to pig,'<br/>

iv. 373;<br/>

  'It is said the only way to make a pig go forward is to pull him<br/>

back by the tail,' v. 355.<br/>
</p>

<p>PILLOW. 'That will do—all that a pillow can do,' iv. 411.</p>

<p>PISTOL. 'When his pistol misses fire, he knocks you down with the
butt end of it' (Colley Cibber) ii. 100.</p>

<p>PITY. 'We should knock him down first, and pity him afterwards,'
iii. 11.</p>

<p>PLAYER. 'A player—a showman—a fellow who exhibits himself for a
shilling,' ii. 234.</p>

<p>PLEASANT. 'Live pleasant' (Burke), i. 344.</p>

<p>PLEASE. 'It is very difficult to please a man against his will,' iii. 69.</p>

<p>PLEASED. 'To make a man pleased with himself, let me tell you, is
doing a very great thing,' iii. 328.</p>

<p>PLEASING. 'We all live upon the hope of pleasing somebody,' ii. 22.</p>

<p>PLEASURE. 'Every pleasure is of itself a good,' iii. 327;<br/>

  'Pleasure is too weak for them and they seek for pain,' iii. 176;<br/>

  'When one doubts as to pleasure, we know what will be the conclusion,'<br/>

iii. 250;<br/>

  'When pleasure can be had it is fit to catch it,' iii. 131.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Plenum.</i> 'There are objections against a <i>plenum</i> and objections
against a <i>vacuum</i>; yet one of them must certainly be true,' i. 444.</p>

<p>PLUME. 'This, Sir, is a new plume to him,' ii. 210.</p>

<p>POCKET. 'I should as soon have thought of picking a pocket,' v. 145.</p>

<p>POCKETS. See above under IMMORTALITY.</p>

<p>POETRY. 'I could as easily apply to law as to tragic poetry,' v. 35;<br/>

  'There is here a great deal of what is called poetry,' iii. 374.<br/>
</p>

<p>POINT. 'Whenever I write anything the public <i>make a point</i> to know
nothing about it' (Goldsmith), iii. 252.</p>

<p>POLES. 'If all this had happened to me, I should have had a couple of
fellows with long poles walking before me, to knock down everybody
that stood in the way,' iii. 264.</p>

<p>POLITENESS. 'Politeness is fictitious benevolence,' v. 82.</p>

<p>POOR. 'A decent provision for the poor is the true test of
civilization,' ii. 130;
  'Resolve never to be poor,' iv. 163.</p>

<p>PORT. 'It is rowing without a port,' iii. 255.<br/>

  See CLARET.<br/>
</p>

<p>POST. 'Sir, I found I must have gilded a rotten post,' i. 266, n. 1.</p>

<p>POSTS. 'If you have the best posts we will have you tied to them and
whipped,' v. 292.</p>

<p>POUND. 'Pound St. Paul's Church into atoms and consider any single
atom; it is to be sure good for nothing; but put all these atoms
together, and you have St. Paul's Church,' i. 440.</p>

<p>POVERTY. 'When I was running about this town a very poor fellow,<br/>

I was a great arguer for the advantages of poverty,' i. 441.<br/>
</p>

<p>POWER. 'I sell here, Sir, what all the world desires to have—Power'<br/>

(Boulton), ii. 459.<br/>
</p>

<p>PRACTICE. 'He does not wear out his principles in practice'<br/>

(Beauclerk), iii. 282.<br/>
</p>

<p>PRAISE. 'All censure of a man's self is oblique praise,' iii. 323;<br/>

  'I know nobody who blasts by praise as you do,' iv. 8l;<br/>

  'Praise and money, the two powerful corrupters of mankind,' iv. 242;<br/>

  'There is no sport in mere praise, when people are all of a mind,'<br/>

v. 273.<br/>
</p>

<p>PRAISES. 'He who praises everybody praises nobody,' iii. 225, n. 3.</p>

<p>PRANCE. 'Sir, if a man has a mind to <i>prance</i> he must study at<br/>

Christ Church and All Souls,' ii. 67, n. 2.<br/>
</p>

<p>PRECEDENCY. See above, FLEA.</p>

<p>PRE-EMINENCE. 'Painful pre-eminence' (Addison), iii. 82, n. 2.</p>

<p>PREJUDICE. 'He set out with a prejudice against prejudices,' ii. 51.</p>

<p>PRESENCE. 'Never speak of a man in his own presence. It is always
indelicate, and may be offensive,' ii. 472;
  'Sir, I honour Derrick for his presence of mind,' i. 457.</p>

<p>PRIG. 'Harris is a prig, and a bad prig,' iii. 245;<br/>

  'What! a prig, Sir?' 'Worse, Madam, a Whig. But he is both,' iii. 294.<br/>
</p>

<p>PRINCIPLES. 'Sir, you are so grossly ignorant of human nature as
not to know, that a man may be very sincere in good principles without
having good practice,' v. 359.</p>

<p>PROBABILITIES. 'Balancing probabilities,' iv. 12.</p>

<p>PRODIGALITY. See above, PARSIMONY.</p>

<p>PROFESSION. 'No man would be of any profession as simply opposed to
not being of it,' ii. 128.</p>

<p>PROPAGATE. 'I would advise no man to marry, Sir, who is not likely
to propagate understanding,' ii. 109, n. 2.</p>

<p>PROPORTION. 'It is difficult to settle the proportion of iniquity
between them,' ii. 12.</p>

<p>PROSPECTS. 'Norway, too, has noble wild prospects,' i. 425.</p>

<p>PROSPERITY. 'Sir, you see in him vulgar prosperity,' iii. 410.</p>

<p>PROVE. 'How will you prove that, Sir?' i. 410, n. 2.</p>

<p>PROVERB. 'A man should take care not to be made a proverb,' iii. 57.</p>

<p>PRY. 'He may still see, though he may not pry,' iii. 61.</p>

<p>PUBLIC. 'Sir, he is one of the many who have made themselves public
without making themselves known,' i. 498.</p>

<p>PUDDING. 'Yet if he should be hanged, none of them will eat a slice
of plum-pudding the less,' ii. 94.</p>

<p><i>Puérilités. 'Il y a beaucoup de puérilités dans la guerre</i>,' iii. 355.</p>

<p>PURPOSES. 'The mind is enlarged and elevated by mere purposes,'
iv. 396, n. 4.</p>

<p>PUTRESCENCE. 'You would not have me for fear of pain perish in
putrescence,' iv. 240, n. 1.</p>

<h4>Q.</h4>

<p><i>Quare</i>. 'A writ of <i>quare adhaesit pavimento</i>' (wags of the Northern
Circuit), iii. 261, n. 2.</p>

<p>QUARREL. 'Perhaps the less we quarrel, the more we hate,'
iii. 417, n. 5.</p>

<p>QUARRELS. 'Men will be sometimes surprised into quarrels,'
iii. 277, n. 2.</p>

<p>QUESTIONING. 'Questioning is not the mode of conversation among
gentlemen,' ii. 472.</p>

<p>QUIET. 'Your primary consideration is your own quiet,' iii. 11.</p>

<p>QUIVER. 'The limbs will quiver and move when the soul is gone,'
iii. 38, n. 6.</p>

<h4>R.</h4>

<p>RAGE. 'He has a rage for saying something where there is nothing
to be said,' i. 329.</p>

<p>RAGS. 'Rags, Sir, will always make their appearance where they have
a right to do it,' iv. 312.</p>

<p>RAINED. 'If it rained knowledge I'd hold out my hand,' iii. 344.</p>

<p>RASCAL. 'I'd throw such a rascal into the river,' i. 469;<br/>

  'With a little more spoiling you will, I think, make me a complete<br/>

rascal,' iii. 1;<br/>

  'Don't be afraid, Sir, you will soon make a very pretty rascal,'<br/>

iv. 200;<br/>

  'Every man of any education would rather be called a rascal than<br/>

accused of deficiency in the graces,' iii. 54.<br/>
</p>

<p>RASCALS. 'Sir, there are rascals in all countries,' iii. 326.</p>

<p>RATIONALITY. 'An obstinate rationality prevents me,' iv. 289.</p>

<p>RATTLE. 'The lad does not care for the child's rattle,' ii. 14.</p>

<p>READ. 'We must read what the world reads at the moment,' iii. 332.</p>

<p>REAR. 'Sir, I can make him rear,' iv. 28.</p>

<p>REASON. 'You may have a reason why two and two should make five,
but they will still make but four,' iii. 375.</p>

<p>REBELLION. 'All rebellion is natural to man,' v. 394.</p>

<p>RECIPROCATE. 'Madam, let us reciprocate,' iii. 408.</p>

<p>RECONCILED. 'Beware of a reconciled enemy' (Italian proverb), iii. 108.</p>

<p>REDDENING. 'It is better she should be reddening her own cheeks than
blackening other people's characters,' iii. 46.</p>

<p>REFORM. 'It is difficult to reform a household gradually,' iii. 362.</p>

<p>RELIGION. 'I am no friend to making religion appear too hard,' v. 316;<br/>

  'Religion scorns a foe like thee' (<i>Epigram),</i> iv. 288.<br/>
</p>

<p>RENT. 'Amendments are seldom made without some token of a rent,' iv. 38.</p>

<p>REPAID. 'Boswell, lend me sixpence—not to be repaid,' iv. 191.</p>

<p>REPAIRS. 'There is a time of life, Sir, when a man requires the
repairs of a table,' i. 470, n. 2.</p>

<p>REPEATING. 'I know nothing more offensive than repeating what one
knows to be foolish things, by way of continuing a dispute, to
see what a man will answer,' iii. 350.</p>

<p>REPUTATION. 'Jonas acquired some reputation by travelling abroad,
but lost it all by travelling at home,' ii. 122.</p>

<p>RESENTMENT. 'Resentment gratifies him who intended an injury,' iv. 367.</p>

<p>RESPECTED. 'Sir, I never before knew how much I was respected by
these gentlemen; they told me none of these things,' iii. 8.</p>

<p>REVIEWERS. 'Set Reviewers at defiance,' v. 274;<br/>

  'The Reviewers will make him hang himself,' iii. 313.<br/>
</p>

<p>RICH. 'It is better to live rich than to die rich,' iii. 304.</p>

<p>RIDICULE. 'Ridicule has gone down before him,' i. 394;<br/>

  'Ridicule is not your talent,' iv. 335.<br/>
</p>

<p>RIDICULOUS. See CHIMNEY.</p>

<p>RIGHT. 'Because a man cannot be right in all things, is he to be
right in nothing?' iii. 410;
  'It seems strange that a man should see so far to the right who
sees so short a way to the left,' iv. 19.</p>

<p>RISING. 'I am glad to find that the man is rising in the world,'
ii. 155, n. 2.</p>

<p>ROCK. 'It is like throwing peas against a rock,' v. 30;<br/>

  'Madam, were they in Asia I would not leave the rock,' v. 223.<br/>
</p>

<p>ROCKS. 'If anything rocks at all, they say it rocks like a cradle,'
iii. 136.</p>

<p>ROPE-DANCING. 'Let him take a course of chemistry, or a course of
rope-dancing,' ii. 440.</p>

<p>ROTTEN. 'Depend upon it, Sir, he who does what he is afraid should
be known has something rotten about him,' ii. 210;
  'Then your rotten sheep are mine,' v. 50.</p>

<p>ROUND. 'Round numbers are always false,' iii. 226, n. 4.</p>

<p>RUFFIAN. 'I hope I shall never be deterred from detecting what I
think a cheat by the menaces of a ruffian,' ii. 298.</p>

<p>RUFFLE. 'If a mere wish could attain it, a man would rather wish to
be able to hem a ruffle,' ii. 357.</p>

<p>RUFFLES. 'Ancient ruffles and modern principles do not agree,' iv. 81.</p>

<p>RUINING. 'He is ruining himself without pleasure,' iii. 348.</p>

<p>RUNTS. 'Mr. Johnson would learn to talk of runts' (Mrs. Salusbury),
iii. 337.</p>

<h4>S.</h4>

<p>SAILOR. 'No man will be a sailor who has contrivance enough to get
himself into a gaol,' v. 137.</p>

<p>SAT. 'Yes, Sir, if he sat next <i>you</i>,' ii. 193.</p>

<p>SAVAGE. 'You talk the language of a savage,' ii. 130.</p>

<p>SAVAGES. 'One set of savages is like another,' iv. 308.</p>

<p>SAY. 'The man is always willing to say what he has to say,' iii. 307.</p>

<p>SCARLET BREECHES. 'It has been a fashion to wear scarlet breeches;
these men would tell you that, according to causes and effects, no
other wear could at that time have been chosen,' iv. 189.</p>

<p>SCHEME. 'Nothing is more hopeless than a scheme of merriment,'
i. 331, n. 5.</p>

<p>SCHEMES. 'It sometimes happens that men entangle themselves in
their own schemes,' iii. 386;
  'Most schemes of political improvement are very laughable things,'
ii. 102.</p>

<p>SCHOOLBOY. 'A schoolboy's exercise may be a pretty thing for a
schoolboy, but it is no treat for a man,' ii. 127.</p>

<p>SCHOOLMASTER. 'You may as well praise a schoolmaster for whipping
a boy who has construed ill,' ii. 88.</p>

<p>SCOTCH. 'I'd rather have you whistle a Scotch tune,' iv. 111;<br/>

  'Scotch conspiracy in national falsehood,' ii. 297;<br/>

  'Sir, it is not so much to be lamented that Old England is lost<br/>

as that the Scotch have found it,' iii. 78;<br/>

  'Why, Sir, all barrenness is comparative. The <i>Scotch</i> would not<br/>

know it to be barren,' iii. 76.<br/>
</p>

<p>SCOTCHMAN. 'Come, gentlemen, let us candidly admit that there is
one Scotchman who is cheerful,' iii. 387;
  'Come, let me know what it is that makes a Scotchman happy,'
v. 346;
  'He left half a crown to a beggarly Scotchman to draw the trigger
after his death,' i. 268;
  'Much may be made of a Scotchman, if he be caught young,' ii. 194;
  'One Scotchman is as good as another,' iv. 101;
  'The noblest prospect which a Scotchman ever sees is the high
road that leads him to England,' i. 425; v. 387;
  'Though the dog is a Scotchman and a Presbyterian, and everything
he should not be,' &amp;c., iv. 98;
  'Why, Sir, I should <i>not</i> have said of Buchanan, had he been an
<i>Englishman,</i> what I will now say of him as a <i>Scotchman,</i>
—that he was the only man of genius his country ever produced,' iv. 185;
  'You would not have been so valuable as you are had you not been
a Scotchman,' iii. 347.</p>

<p>SCOTCHMEN. <i>'Droves</i> of Scotchmen would come up and attest anything
for the honour of Scotland,' ii. 311;
  'I shall suppose Scotchmen made necessarily, and Englishmen by
choice,' v. 48;
  'It was remarked of Mallet that he was the only Scot whom Scotchmen
did not commend,' ii. 159, n. 3;
  'We have an inundation of Scotchmen' (Wilkes), iv. 101.</p>

<p>SCOTLAND. 'A Scotchman must be a very sturdy moralist who does not<br/>

love Scotland better than truth,' ii. 311, <i>n. 4</i>; v. 389, n. 1;<br/>

  'Describe the inn, Sir? Why, it was so bad that Boswell wished to<br/>

be in Scotland,' iii. 51;<br/>

  'If one man in Scotland gets possession of two thousand pounds,<br/>

what remains for all the rest of the nation?' iv. 101;<br/>

  'Oats. A grain which in England is generally given to horses,<br/>

but in Scotland supports the people,' i. 294, n. 8;<br/>

  'Seeing Scotland, Madam, is only seeing a worse England,' iii. 248;<br/>

  'Sir, you have desert enough in Scotland,' ii. 75;<br/>

  'Things which grow wild here must be cultivated with great care in<br/>

Scotland. Pray, now, are you ever able to bring the sloe to perfection?'<br/>

ii. 77;<br/>

  'Why so is Scotland <i>your</i> native place,' ii. 52.<br/>
</p>

<p>SCOUNDREL. 'Fludyer turned out a scoundrel, a Whig,' ii. 444;<br/>

  'I told her she was a scoundrel' (a carpenter), ii. 456, n. 3;<br/>

  'Ready to become a scoundrel, Madam,' iii. 1;<br/>

  'Sir, he was a scoundrel and coward,' i. 268.<br/>
</p>

<p>SCREEN. 'He stood as a screen between me and death' (Swift), iii.
441, n. 3.</p>

<p>SCRIBBLING. 'The worst way of being intimate is by scribbling,' v.
93.</p>

<p>SCRUPLES. 'Whoever loads life with unnecessary scruples,' &amp;c., ii. 72,
n. 1.</p>

<p>SEE. 'Let us endeavour to see things as they are,' i. 339.</p>

<p><i>Semel Baro semper Baro</i> (Boswell), i. 492, n. 1.</p>

<p>SEND. 'Nay, Sir; we'll send you to him,' iii. 315.</p>

<p>SENSATION. 'Sensation is sensation,' v. 95.</p>

<p>SENSE. 'He grasps more sense than he can hold,' iv. 98:
'Nay, Sir, it was not the <i>wine</i> that made your head ache, but the
<i>sense</i> that I put into it,' iii. 381.</p>

<p>SERENITY. 'The serenity that is not felt it can be no virtue to
feign,' iv. 395.</p>

<p>SEVERITY. 'Severity is not the way to govern either boys or men'<br/>

(Lord Mansfield), ii. 186.<br/>
</p>

<p>SHADOWY. 'Why, Sir, something of a shadowy being,' ii. 178.</p>

<p>SHALLOWS. 'All shallows are clear,' v. 44, n. 3.</p>

<p>SHERRY. 'Why, Sir, Sherry is dull, naturally dull; but it must have
taken him a great deal of pains to become what we now see him. Such
an excess of stupidity, Sir, is not in Nature,' i. 453.</p>

<p>SHIFT. 'As long as you have the use of your tongue and your pen,
never, Sir, be reduced to that shift,' iv. 190, n. 2.</p>

<p>SHINE. 'You shine, indeed, but it is by being ground,' iii. 386.</p>

<p>SHIP. Being in a ship is being in a jail, with the chance of being
drowned,' i. 348; v. 137;
  'It is getting on horseback in a ship' (Hierocles), v. 308.</p>

<p>SHIRT. 'It is like a shirt made for a man when he was a child and
enlarged always as he grows older,' v. 217.</p>

<p>SHIVER. 'Why do you shiver?' i. 462.</p>

<p>SHOE. 'Had the girl in <i>The Mourning Bride</i> said she could not cast
her shoe to the top of one of the pillars in the temple, it would
not have aided the idea, but weakened it,' ii. 87.</p>

<p>SHOEMAKER. 'As I take my shoes from the shoemaker and my coat from
the tailor, so I take my religion from the priest' (Goldsmith), ii. 214.</p>

<p>SHOES. 'Mankind could do better without your books than without my
shoes,' i. 448.</p>

<p>SHOOT. 'You do not see one man shoot a great deal higher than another,'<br/>

ii. 450;<br/>

  'You have <i>set</i> him that I might shoot him, but I have not shot him,'<br/>

iv. 83.<br/>
</p>

<p>SHOOTERS. 'Where there are many shooters, some will hit,' iii. 254.</p>

<p>SHORT-HAND. 'A long head is as good as short-hand' (Mrs. Thrale), iv. 166.</p>

<p>SHOT. 'He is afraid of being shot getting <i>into</i> a house, or hanged
when he has got <i>out</i> of it,' iv. 127.</p>

<p>SICK. 'Sir, you have but two topics, yourself and me, I am sick of<br/>

both,' iii. 57;<br/>

  'To a sick man what is the public?' iv. 260, n. 2.<br/>
</p>

<p>SIEVE. 'Sir, that is the blundering economy of a narrow understanding.<br/>

It is stopping one hole in a sieve,' iii. 300.<br/>
</p>

<p>SINNING. 'The gust of eating pork with the pleasure of sinning'<br/>

(Dr. Barrowby), iv. 292.<br/>
</p>

<p>SLAUGHTER-HOUSE. 'Let's go into the slaughter-house again, Lanky.<br/>

But I am afraid there is more blood than brains,' iv. 20.<br/>
</p>

<p>SLIGHT. 'If it is a slight man and a slight thing you may [laugh at
a man to his face], for you take nothing valuable from him,' iii. 338.</p>

<p>SLUT. 'She was generally slut and drunkard, occasionally whore and
thief,' iv. 103.</p>

<p>SMALL. 'Small certainties are the bane of men of talents' (Strahan),
ii. 323.</p>

<p>SMILE. 'Let me smile with the wise, and feed with the rich,' ii. 79.</p>

<p>SOBER. 'I would not keep company with a fellow who lies as long as
he is sober, and whom you must make drunk before you can get a word
of truth out of him,' ii. 188.</p>

<p>SOCIETY. 'He puts something into our society and takes nothing out
of it,' v. 178.</p>

<p>SOCKET. 'The blaze of reputation cannot be blown out, but it often
dies in the socket,' iii. 423.</p>

<p>SOFT. 'Sir, it is such a recommendation as if I should throw you out
of a two pair of stairs window, and recommend to you to fall soft,'
iv. 323.</p>

<p>SOLDIERS. 'Soldiers die scattering bullets,' v. 240.</p>

<p>SOLEMNITY. 'There must be a kind of solemnity in the manner of a
professional man,' iv. 310.</p>

<p>SOLITARY. 'Be not solitary, be not idle' (Burton), iii. 415.</p>

<p>SOLITUDE. 'This full-peopled world is a dismal solitude,' iv. 147, n. 2.</p>

<p>SORROW. 'There is no wisdom in useless and hopeless sorrow,' iii.
137, n. 1.</p>

<p>SORRY. 'Sir, he said all that a man should say; he said he was sorry
for it,' ii. 436.</p>

<p>SPARROWS. 'You may take a field piece to shoot sparrows, but all the
sparrows you can bring home will not be worth the charge,' v. 261.</p>

<p><i>Spartam. 'Spartam quam nactus es orna</i>,' iv. 379.</p>

<p>SPEAK. 'A man cannot with propriety speak of himself, except he
relates simple facts,' iii. 323.</p>

<p>SPEND. 'He has neither spirit to spend nor resolution to spare,' iii.
317.</p>

<p>SPENDS. 'A man who both spends and saves money is the happiest
man,' iii. 322.</p>

<p>SPIRITUAL COURT. 'Sir, I can put her into the Spiritual Court,' i.
101.</p>

<p>SPLENDOUR. 'Let us breakfast in splendour,' iii. 400.</p>

<p>SPOILED. 'Like sour small beer, she could never have been a good
thing, and even that bad thing is spoiled,' v. 449, n. 1.</p>

<p>SPOONS. 'If he does really think that there is no distinction between
virtue and vice, why, Sir, when he leaves our houses let us count our
spoons,' i. 432.</p>

<p>STAMP. 'I was resolved not to give you the advantage even of a stamp
in the argument' (Parr), iv. 15, n. 5.</p>

<p>STAND. 'They resolved they would <i>stand by their country,'</i> i. 164.</p>

<p>STATELY. 'That will not be the case [i.e. you will not be imposed on]
if you go to a stately shop, as I always do,' iv. 319.</p>

<p>STOCKS. 'A man who preaches in the stocks will always have hearers<br/>

enough,' ii. 251;<br/>

  'Stocks for the men, a ducking-stool for women, and a pound for<br/>

beasts,' iii. 287.<br/>
</p>

<p>STONE. 'Chinese is only more difficult from its rudeness; as there is
more labour in hewing down a tree with a stone than with an axe,'
iii. 339.</p>

<p>STONES. 'I don't care how often or how high he tosses me when only
friends are present, for then I fall upon soft ground; but I do not
like falling on stones, which is the case when enemies are present'
(Boswell), iii. 338;
  'The boys would throw stones at him,' ii. 193.</p>

<p>STORY. 'If you were to read Richardson for the story your impatience
would be so much fretted that you would hang yourself,' ii. 175.</p>

<p>STORY-TELLER. 'I told the circumstance first for my own amusement,
but I will not be dragged in as story-teller to a company,' iv.
192, n. 2.</p>

<p>STRAIGHT. 'He has a great deal of learning; but it never lies straight,'
iv. 225.</p>

<p>STRANGE. 'I'm never strange in a strange place' (Journey to London),
iv. 284.</p>

<p>STRATAGEM. 'This comes of stratagem,' iii. 275.</p>

<p>STRAW. 'The first man who balanced a straw upon his nose… deserved
the applause of mankind,' iii. 231.</p>

<p>STRETCH. 'Babies like to be told of giants and castles, and of somewhat
which can stretch and stimulate their little minds,' iv. 8, n. 3.</p>

<p>STRIKE. 'A man cannot strike till he has his weapons,' iii. 316.</p>

<p>STUFF. 'It is sad stuff; it is brutish,' ii. 228;
  'This now is such stuff as I used to talk to my mother, when I
first began to think myself a clever fellow, and she ought to have
whipped me for it,' ii. 14.</p>

<p>STUNNED. 'We are not to be stunned and astonished by him,' iv. 83.</p>

<p>STYE. 'Sir, he brings himself to the state of a hog in a stye,'
iii. 152.</p>

<p>STYLE. 'Nothing is more easy than to write enough in that style if
once you begin,' v. 388.</p>

<p>SUCCEED. 'He is only fit to succeed himself,' ii. 132.</p>

<p>SUCCESSFUL. 'Man commonly cannot be successful in different ways,'
iv. 83.</p>

<p>SUICIDE. 'Sir, It would be a civil suicide,' iv. 223.</p>

<p>SULLEN. 'Harris is a sound sullen scholar,' iii. 245.</p>

<p>SUNSHINE. 'Dr. Mead lived more in the broad sunshine of life than
almost any man,' iii. 355.</p>

<p>SUPERIORITY. 'You shall retain your superiority by my not knowing
it,' ii. 220.</p>

<p>SURLY. 'Surly virtue,' i. 130.</p>

<p>SUSPICION. 'Suspicion is very often an useless pain,' iii. 135.</p>

<p>SWEET. 'It has not wit enough to keep it sweet,' iv. 320.</p>

<p>SWORD. 'It is like a man who has a sword that will not draw,' ii. 161.</p>

<p>SYBIL. 'It has all the contortions of the Sybil, without the
inspiration,' iv. 59.</p>

<p>SYSTEM. 'No, Sir, let fanciful men do as they will, depend upon it, it
is difficult to disturb the system of life,' ii. 102.</p>

<p>SYSTEMATICALLY. 'Kurd, Sir, is one of a set of men who account for
everything systematically,' iv. 189.</p>

<h4>T.</h4>

<p>TABLE. 'Sir, if Lord Mansfield were in a company of General Officers
and Admirals who have been in service, he would shrink; he'd wish to
creep under the table,' iii. 265;
  'As to the style, it is fit for the second table,' iii. 31.</p>

<p>TAIL. 'If any man has a tail, it is Col,' v. 330;
  'I will not be baited with what and why; what is this? what is that?
why is a cow's tail long? why is a fox's tail bushy?' iii. 268.</p>

<p>TAILS. 'If they have tails they hide them,' v. 111.</p>

<p>TALK. 'Solid talk,' v. 365:'<br/>

  There is neither meat, drink, nor talk,' iii. 186, n. 3;<br/>

  'Well, we had good talk,' ii. 66;<br/>

  'You may talk as other people do,' iv. 221.<br/>
</p>

<p>TALKED. 'While they talked, you said nothing,' v. 39.</p>

<p>TALKING. 'People may come to do anything almost, by talking of it,'
v. 286.</p>

<p>TALKS. 'A man who talks for fame never can be pleasing. The man
who talks to unburthen his mind is the man to delight you,' iii. 247.</p>

<p>TASKS. 'Never impose tasks upon mortals,' iii. 420.</p>

<p>TAVERN. 'A tavern chair is the throne of human felicity,' ii. 452,
n. 1.</p>

<p>TEACH. 'It is no matter what you teach them first, any more than
what leg you shall put into your breeches first,' i. 452.</p>

<p>TEA-KETTLE. 'We must not compare the noise made by your tea-kettle
here with the roaring of the ocean,' ii. 86, n. i.</p>

<p>TELL. 'It is not so; do not tell this again,' iii. 229;<br/>

  'Why, Sir, so am I. But I do not tell it,' iv. 191.<br/>
</p>

<p>TENDERNESS. 'Want of tenderness is want of parts,' ii. 122.</p>

<p>TERROR. 'Looking back with sorrow and forward with terror,' iv.
253, n. 4.</p>

<p>TESTIMONY. 'Testimony is like an arrow shot from a long bow'<br/>

(Boyle), iv. 281.<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Tête-à-tête.</i> 'You must not indulge your delicacy too much; or
you will be a <i>tête-à-tête</i> man all your life,' iii. 376.</p>

<p>THE. 'The tender infant, meek and mild,' ii. 212, n. 4.</p>

<p>THEOLOGIAN. 'I say, Lloyd, I'm the best theologian, but you are the
best Christian,' vi. liv.</p>

<p>THIEF. See SLUT.</p>

<p>THINK. You may talk in this manner,….but don't <i>think</i> foolishly,'<br/>

iv. 221;<br/>

  'To attempt to think them down is madness,' ii. 440.<br/>
</p>

<p>THOUGHT. 'Thought is better than no thought,' iv. 309.</p>

<p>THOUSAND. 'A man accustomed to throw for a thousand pounds, if
set down to throw for sixpence, would not be at the pains to count
his dice,' iv. 167.</p>

<p><i>Tig.</i> 'There was too much <i>Tig</i> and <i>Tirry</i> in it,' ii. 127, n. 3.</p>

<p>TIMBER. 'Consider, Sir, the value of such a piece of timber here,' v.
319.</p>

<p>TIME. 'He that runs against time has an antagonist not subject to
casualties,' i. 319, n. 3.</p>

<p>TIMIDITY. 'I have no great timidity in my own disposition, and am no
encourager of it in others,' iv. 200, n. 4.</p>

<p>TIPTOE. 'He is tall by walking on tiptoe,' iv. 13, n. 2.</p>

<p>TONGUE. 'What have you to do with Liberty and Necessity? Or
what more than to hold your tongue about it?' iv. 71.</p>

<p>TOPICS. See SICK.</p>

<p>TORMENTOR. 'That creature was its own tormentor, and, I believe,
its name was Boswell,' i. 470.</p>

<p>TORPEDO. 'A pen is to Tom a torpedo; the touch of it benumbs his
hand and his brain,' i. 159, n. 4.</p>

<p>TOSSED. 'You tossed and gored several persons' (Boswell), ii. 66;
iii. 338</p>

<p>TOWERING. 'Towering in the confidence of twenty-one,' i. 324.</p>

<p>TOWN. 'The town is my element,' iv. 358.</p>

<p>TOWSER. 'As for an estate newly acquired by trade, you may give it,
if you will, to the dog Towser, and let him keep his own name,' ii. 261.</p>

<p>TRADE. 'A merchant may, perhaps, be a man of an enlarged mind; but
there is nothing in trade connected with an enlarged mind, v. 328;
  'This rage of trade will destroy itself,' v. 231.</p>

<p>TRADESMEN. 'They have lost the civility of tradesmen without acquiring
the manners of gentlemen,' ii. 120.</p>

<p>TRAGEDY. 'I never did the man an injury; but he would persist in
reading his tragedy to me,' iv. 244, n. 2.</p>

<p>TRANSLATION. 'Sir, I do not say that it may not be made a very good
translation,' iii. 373.</p>

<p>TRANSMITTER. 'No tenth transmitter of a foolish face' (Savage), i.
166, n. 3.</p>

<p>TRAPS. 'I play no tricks; I lay no traps,' iii. 316.</p>

<p>TRAVELLERS. 'Ancient travellers guessed, modern measure,' iii. 356;
  'There has been, of late, a strange turn in travellers to be
displeased,' iii. 236.</p>

<p>TRAVELLING. 'When you set travelling against mere negation, against
doing nothing, it is better to be sure,' iii. 352.</p>

<p>TRICKS. 'All tricks are either knavish or childish,' iii. 396.</p>

<p>TRIM. 'A mile may be as trim as a square yard,' iii. 272.</p>

<p>TRIUMPH. 'It was the triumph of hope over experience,' ii. 128.</p>

<p>TRUTH. 'I considered myself as entrusted with a certain portion of
truth,' iv. 65;
  'Every man has a right to utter what he thinks truth, and every
other man has a right to knock him down for it,' iv. 12;
  'Nobody has a right to put another under such a difficulty that he
must either hurt the person by telling the truth, or hurt himself
by telling what is not truth,' iii. 320;
  'Poisoning the sources of eternal truth,' v. 42.</p>

<p>TUMBLING. 'Sir, a man will no more carry the artifice of the Bar into
the common intercourse of society, than a man who is paid for tumbling
upon his hands will continue to tumble upon his hands when he
should walk on his feet,' ii. 48.</p>

<p>TURN. 'He had no turn to economy' (Langton), iii, 363, n. 2.</p>

<p>TURNPIKE. 'For my own part now, I consider supper as a turnpike
through which one must pass in order to get to bed' (Boswell or
Edwards), iii. 306.</p>

<p>TURNSPIT. 'The fellow is as awkward as a turnspit when first put
into the wheel, and as sleepy as a dormouse,' iv. 411.</p>

<p>TYRANNY. 'There is a remedy in human nature against tyranny,' ii. 170.</p>

<h4>U.</h4>

<p>UNCERTAINTY. 'After the uncertainty of all human things at Hector's
this invitation came very well,' ii. 456.</p>

<p>UNCHARITABLY. 'Who is the worse for being talked of uncharitably? iv. 97.</p>

<p>UNCIVIL. 'I <i>did</i> mean to be uncivil, thinking <i>you</i> had been uncivil,'<br/>

iii. 273;<br/>

  'Sir, a man has no more right to <i>say</i> an uncivil thing than<br/>

to <i>act one</i>,' iv. 28.<br/>
</p>

<p>UNDERMINED. 'A stout healthy old man is like a tower undermined'<br/>

(Bacon), iv. 277.<br/>
</p>

<p>UNDERSTANDING. 'Sir, I have found you an argument, but I am not
obliged to find you an understanding,' iv. 313;
  'When it comes to dry understanding, man has the better
[of woman],' iii. 52.</p>

<p>UNEASY. 'I am angry with him who makes me uneasy,' iii. II.</p>

<p>UNPLIABLE. 'She had come late into life, and had a mighty unpliable
understanding,' v. 296.</p>

<p>UNSETTLE. 'They tended to unsettle everything, and yet settled
nothing,' ii. 124.</p>

<p>USE. 'Never mind the use; do it,' ii. 92.</p>

<h4>V.</h4>

<p>VACUITY. 'I find little but dismal vacuity, neither business nor
pleasure,' iii. 380, n. 3;
  'Madam, I do not like to come down to vacuity,' ii. 410.</p>

<p>VERSE. 'Verse sweetens toil' (Gifford), v. 117.</p>

<p>VERSES. 'They are the forcible verses of a man of a strong mind,
but not accustomed to write verse,' iv. 24.</p>

<p>VEX. 'He delighted to vex them, no doubt; but he had more delight in<br/>

seeing how well he could vex them,' ii. 334;<br/>

  'Sir, he hoped it would vex somebody,' iv. 9;<br/>

  'Public affairs vex no man,' iv. 220.<br/>
</p>

<p>VICE. 'Thy body is all vice, and thy mind all virtue,' i. 250;
'Madam, you are here not for the love of virtue but the fear of
vice,' ii. 435.</p>

<p>VIRTUE. 'I think there is some reason for questioning whether virtue
cannot stand its ground as long as life,' iv. 374, n. 5.</p>

<p><i>Vitam. 'Vitam continet una dies,'</i> i, 84.</p>

<p>VIVACITY. 'There is a courtly vivacity  about the fellow,' ii. 465;
  'Depend upon it, Sir, vivacity is much an art, and depends greatly
on habit,' ii. 462.</p>

<p><i>Vivite. 'Vivite laeti</i>,' i. 344, n. 4.</p>

<p>VOW. 'The man who cannot go to heaven without a vow may go—,' iii. 357.</p>

<h4>W.</h4>

<p>WAG. 'Every man has some time in his life an ambition to be a wag,'
iv. I, n. 2.</p>

<p>WAIT. 'Sir, I can wait,' iv. 21.</p>

<p>WALK. 'Let us take a walk from Charing Cross to Whitechapel, through,<br/>

I suppose, the greatest series of shops in the world,' ii. 218.<br/>
</p>

<p>WANT. 'You have not mentioned the greatest of all their wants—the
want of law,' ii. 126;
  'Have you no better manners? There is your want,' ii. 475.</p>

<p>WANTS. 'We are more uneasy from thinking of our wants than happy
in thinking of our acquisitions' (Windham), iii. 354.</p>

<p>WAR. 'War and peace divide the business of the world,' iii. 361, n. 1.</p>

<p>WATCH. 'He was like a man who resolves to regulate his time by a
certain watch, but will not enquire whether the watch is right or
not,' ii. 213.</p>

<p>WATER. 'A man who is drowned has more water than either of us,'<br/>

v. 34;<br/>

  'Come, Sir, drink water, and put in for a hundred,' iii. 306;<br/>

  'Water is the same everywhere,' v. 54.<br/>
</p>

<p>WAY. 'Sir, you don't see your way through that question,' ii. 122.</p>

<p>WEAK-NERVED. 'I know no such weak-nerved people,' iv. 280.</p>

<p>WEALTH. 'The sooner that a man begins to enjoy his wealth the better,'
ii. 226.</p>

<p>WEAR. 'No man's face has had more wear and tear,' ii. 410.</p>

<p>WEIGHT. 'He runs about with little weight upon his mind,' ii. 375.</p>

<p>WELL. 'They are well when they are not ill' (Temple), iv. 379.</p>

<p>WENCH. 'Madam, she is an odious wench,' iii. 298.</p>

<p>WHALES. 'If you were to make little fishes talk, they would talk
like whales' (Goldsmith), ii. 231.</p>

<p>WHELP. 'It is wonderful how the whelp has written such things,' iii.
51.</p>

<p>WHIG. 'A Whig may be a fool, a Tory must be so' (Horace Walpole),<br/>

iv. 117, n. 5;<br/>

  'He hated a fool, and he hated a rogue, and he hated a Whig; he<br/>

was a very good hater,' i. 190, n. 2;<br/>

  'He was a Whig who pretended to be honest,' v. 339;<br/>

  'I do not like much to see a Whig in any dress, but I hate to see<br/>

a Whig in a parson's gown,' v. 255;<br/>

  'Sir, he is a cursed Whig, a bottomless Whig, as they all are now,'<br/>

iv. 223;<br/>

  'Sir, I perceive you are a vile Whig,' ii. 170;<br/>

  'The first Whig was the Devil,' iii. 326;<br/>

  'Though a Whig, he had humanity' (A. Campbell), v. 357.<br/>
</p>

<p>WHIGGISM. 'They have met in a place where there is no room for<br/>

Whiggism,' v. 385;<br/>

  'Whiggism was latterly no better than the politics of stock-jobbers,<br/>

and the religion of infidels,' ii. 117;<br/>

  'Whiggism is a negation of all principle,' i. 431.<br/>
</p>

<p>WHINE. 'A man knows it must be so and submits. It will do him no
good to whine,' ii. 107.</p>

<p>WHORE. 'They teach the morals of a whore and the manners of a<br/>

dancing-master,' i. 266;<br/>

  'The woman's a whore, and there's an end on't,' ii. 247.<br/>

  See SLUT.<br/>
</p>

<p>WHY, SIR. 'Why, Sir, as to the good or evil of card-playing—,'
iii. 23.</p>

<p>WIG. 'In England any man who wears a sword and a powdered wig is
ashamed to be illiterate,' iii. 254.</p>

<p>WILDS. See BRIARS.</p>

<p>WIND. 'The noise of the wind was all its own' (Boswell), v. 407.</p>

<p>WINDOW. See SOFT.</p>

<p>WINE. 'I now no more think of drinking wine than a horse does,' iii. 250;<br/>

  'It is wine only to the eye,' iii. 381; 'This is one of the<br/>

disadvantages of wine. It makes a man mistake words for thoughts,'<br/>

iii. 329:<br/>

  See SENSE.<br/>
</p>

<p>WISDOM. 'Every man is to take care of his own wisdom, and his own
virtue, without minding too much what others think,' iii. 405.</p>

<p>WIT. 'His trade is wit,' iii. 389;<br/>

  'His trade was wisdom' (Baretti), iii. 137, n. 1;<br/>

  'Sir, Mrs. Montagu does not make a trade of her wit,' iv. 275;<br/>

  'This man, I thought, had been a Lord among wits; but I find he<br/>

is only a wit among Lords,' i. 266;<br/>

  'Wit is generally false reasoning' (Wycherley), iii. 23, n. 3.<br/>
</p>

<p>WITHOUT. 'Without ands or ifs,' &amp;c. (anonymous poet), v. 127.</p>

<p>WOMAN. 'No woman is the worse for sense and knowledge,' v. 226.</p>

<p>WOMAN'S. 'Sir, a woman's preaching is like a dog's walking on his
hinder legs. It is not done well; but you are surprised to find it
done at all,' i. 463.</p>

<p>WOMEN. 'Women have a perpetual envy of our vices,' iv. 291.</p>

<p>WONDER. 'The natural desire of man to propagate a wonder,' iii.<br/>

229, n. 3;<br/>

  'Sir, you <i>may</i> wonder, ii. 15.<br/>
</p>

<p>WONDERS. 'Catching greedily at wonders,' i. 498, n. 4.</p>

<p>WOOL. 'Robertson is like a man who has packed gold in wool; the
wool takes up more room than the gold,' ii. 237.</p>

<p>WORK. 'How much do you think you and I could get in a week if
we were to <i>work as hard</i> as we could?' i. 246.</p>

<p>WORLD. 'All the complaints which are made of the world are unjust,'<br/>

iv. 172;<br/>

  'Poets who go round the world,' v. 311;<br/>

  'One may be so much a man of the world as to be nothing in the<br/>

world,' iii. 375;<br/>

  'The world has always a right to be regarded, ii. 74, n. 3;<br/>

  'This world where much is to be done, and little to be known,'<br/>

iv. 370, n. 3;<br/>

  'That man sat down to write a book to tell the world what the<br/>

world had all his life been telling him,' ii. 126.<br/>
</p>

<p>WORST. 'It may be said of the worst man that he does more good
than evil,' iii. 236.</p>

<p>WORTH. 'Worth seeing? Yes; but not worth going to see,' iii. 410.</p>

<p>WRITE. 'A man should begin to write soon,' iv. 12.</p>

<p>WRITING. 'I allow you may have pleasure from writing after it is
over, if you have written well; but you don't go willingly to it again,'
iv. 219.</p>

<p>WRITTEN. 'I never desire to converse with a man who has written more
than he has read,' ii. 48, n. 2;
  'No man was ever written down but by himself (Bentley), v. 274.</p>

<p>WRONG. 'It is not probable that two people can be wrong the same way,'
iv. 5.</p>

<h4>Y.</h4>

<p>YELPS. 'How is it that we hear the loudest yelps for liberty among
the drivers of negroes?' iii. 201.</p>

<p>YES. 'Do you know how to say <i>yes</i> or <i>no</i> properly?' (Swift),
iv. 295, n. 5.</p>

<h4>Z.</h4>

<p>ZEALOUS. 'I do not love a man who is zealous for nothing' (Goldsmith),
iii. 376.</p>

<p>***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIFE OF JOHNSON, VOLUME 6 (OF 6)***</p>

<p>******* This file should be named 11729-8.txt or 11729-8.zip *******</p>

<p>This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
https://www.gutenberg.org/1/1/7/2/11729</p>

<p>Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions
will be renamed.</p>

<p>Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away—you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.</p>

<h3>*** START: FULL LICENSE ***</h3>

<h5>THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK</h5>

<p>To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).</p>

<h4>Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works</h4>

<p>1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.</p>

<p>1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.</p>

<p>1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.</p>

<p>1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.</p>

<p>1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:</p>

<p>1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:</p>

<p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org</p>

<p>1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.</p>

<p>1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.</p>

<p>1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.</p>

<p>1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.</p>

<p>1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.</p>

<p>1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.</p>

<p>1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that</p>

<p id="id01760" style="margin-left: 0%; margin-right: 0%">- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."</p>

<p id="id01761" style="margin-left: 0%; margin-right: 0%">- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.</p>

<p id="id01762" style="margin-left: 0%; margin-right: 0%">- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.</p>

<p id="id01763" style="margin-left: 0%; margin-right: 0%">- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.</p>

<p>1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.</p>

<h5>1.F.</h5>

<p>1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.</p>

<p>1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.</p>

<p>1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.</p>

<p>1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.</p>

<p>1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.</p>

<p>1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.</p>

<h4>Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm</h4>

<p>Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.</p>

<p>Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.</p>

<h4>Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation</h4>

<p>The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.</p>

<p>The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org</p>

<p>For additional contact information:<br/>

     Dr. Gregory B. Newby<br/>

     Chief Executive and Director<br/>

     gbnewby@pglaf.org<br/>
</p>

<h5>Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation</h5>

<p>Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.</p>

<p>The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org</p>

<p>While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.</p>

<p>International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.</p>

<p>Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate</p>

<h4>Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.</h4>

<p>Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.</p>

<p>Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.</p>

<p>Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.</p>

<p>Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.</p>

<p>Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:</p>

<p>https://www.gutenberg.org</p>

<p>This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.</p>

<p>EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.</p>

<p>http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06<br/>
</p>

<p>    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,<br/>

     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)<br/>
</p>

<p>EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:</p>

<p>https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234</p>

<p>or filename 24689 would be found at:
https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689</p>

<p>An alternative method of locating eBooks:
https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL</p>

<h5>*** END: FULL LICENSE ***</h5>

</body>
</html>