<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Dedication</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="dedication" epub:type="dedication">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dedication</h2>
			<h4><i>TO SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS</i>.</h4>
			<h5>MY DEAR SIR,</h5>
			<p>Every liberal motive that can actuate an Author in the dedication of his labours, concurs in directing me to you, as the person to whom the following Work should be inscribed.</p>
			<p>If there be a pleasure in celebrating the distinguished merit of a contemporary, mixed with a certain degree of vanity not altogether inexcusable, in appearing fully sensible of it, where can I find one, in complimenting whom I can with more general approbation gratify those feelings? Your excellence not only in the Art over which you have long presided with unrivalled fame, but also in Philosophy and elegant Literature, is well known to the present, and will continue to be the admiration of future ages. Your equal and placid temper,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a> your variety of conversation, your true politeness, by which you are so amiable in private society, and that enlarged hospitality which has long made your house a common centre of union for the great, the accomplished, the learned, and the ingenious; all these qualities I can, in perfect confidence of not being accused of flattery, ascribe to you.</p>
			<p>If a man may indulge an honest pride, in having it known to the world, that he has been thought worthy of particular attention by a person of the first eminence in the age in which he lived, whose company has been universally courted, I am justified in availing myself of the usual privilege of a Dedication, when I mention that there has been a long and uninterrupted friendship between us.</p>
			<a name="1-2"/>
			<p>If gratitude should be acknowledged for favours received, I have this opportunity, my dear Sir, most sincerely to thank you for the many happy hours which I owe to your kindness⁠—for the cordiality with which you have at all times been pleased to welcome me⁠—for the number of valuable acquaintances to whom you have introduced me⁠—for the <i>noctes coenaeque Deûm</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a> which I have enjoyed under your roof.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a></p>
			<p>If a work should be inscribed to one who is master of the subject of it, and whose approbation, therefore, must ensure it credit and success, the <i>Life of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson</i> is, with the greatest propriety, dedicated to Sir Joshua Reynolds, who was the intimate and beloved friend of that great man; the friend, whom he declared to be “the most invulnerable man he knew; whom, if he should quarrel with him, he should find the most difficulty how to abuse.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a>” You, my dear Sir, studied him, and knew him well: you venerated and admired him. Yet, luminous as he was upon the whole, you perceived all the shades which mingled in the grand composition; all the little peculiarities and slight blemishes which marked the literary Colossus. Your very warm commendation of the specimen which I gave in my <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>, of my being able to preserve his conversation in an authentick and lively manner, which opinion the Public has confirmed, was the best encouragement for me to persevere in my purpose of producing the whole of my stores.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a></p>
			<p>In one respect, this Work will, in some passages, be different from the former. In my <i>Tour</i>, I was almost unboundedly open in my communications, and from my eagerness to display the wonderful fertility and readiness of Johnson’s wit, freely showed to the world its dexterity, even when I was myself the object of it. I trusted that I should be liberally understood, as knowing very well what I was about, and by no means as simply unconscious of the pointed effects of the satire. I own, indeed, that I was arrogant enough to suppose that the tenour of the rest of the book would sufficiently guard me against such a strange imputation. But it seems I judged too well of the world; for, though I could scarcely believe it, I have been undoubtedly informed, that many persons, especially in distant quarters, not penetrating enough into Johnson’s character, so as to understand his mode of treating his friends, have arraigned my judgement, instead of seeing that I was sensible of all that they could observe.</p>
			<p>It is related of the great <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clarke,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a> that when in one of his leisure hours he was unbending himself with a few friends in the most playful and frolicksome manner, he observed Beau Nash approaching; upon which he suddenly stopped:⁠—“My boys, (said he,) let us be grave: here comes a fool.” The world, my friend, I have found to be a great fool, as to that particular, on which it has become necessary to speak very plainly. I have, therefore, in this Work been more reserved;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a> and though I tell nothing but the truth, I have still kept in my mind that the whole truth is not always to be exposed. This, however, I have managed so as to occasion no diminution of the pleasure which my book should afford; though malignity may sometimes be disappointed of its gratifications.</p>
			<a name="1-4"/>
			<p>I am,</p>
			<p>My dear Sir,</p>
			<p>Your much obliged friend,</p>
			<p>And faithful humble servant,</p>
			<h5>JAMES BOSWELL.</h5>
			<p>London,</p>
			<p>April 20, 1791.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
