<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Advertisement to the Third Edition</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="foreword-3" epub:type="foreword">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Advertisement to the Third Edition</h2>
			<p id="I-page-14">Several valuable letters, and other curious matter, having been communicated to the Author too late to be arranged in that chronological order which he had endeavoured uniformly to observe in his work, he was obliged to introduce them in his Second Edition, by way of <b>addenda</b>, as commodiously as he could. In the present edition these have been distributed in their proper places. In revising his volumes for a new edition, he had pointed out where some of these materials should be inserted; but unfortunately in the midst of his labours, he was seized with a fever, of which, to the great regret of all his friends, he died on the <time datetime="1795-05-19">19th of May, 1795</time>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-79" id="noteref-79" epub:type="noteref">79</a> All the Notes that he had written in the <a id="I-page-15"/>margin of the copy which he had in part revised, are here faithfully preserved; and a few new Notes have been added, principally by some of those friends to whom the Author in the former editions acknowledged his obligations. Those subscribed with the letter B were communicated by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Burney: those to which the letters J B are annexed, by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Blakeway, of Shrewsbury, to whom <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boswell acknowledged himself indebted for some judicious remarks on the first edition of his work: and the letters J B-O. are annexed to some remarks furnished by the Author’s second son, a Student of Brazen-Nose College in Oxford. Some valuable observations were communicated by James Bindley, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, First Commissioner in the Stamp-Office, which have been acknowledged in their proper places. For all those without any signature, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Malone is answerable.⁠—Every new remark, not written by the Author, for the sake of distinction has been enclosed within crotchets: in one instance, however, the printer by mistake has affixed this mark to a note relative to the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Thomas Fysche Palmer, which was written by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boswell. and therefore ought not to have been thus distinguished.</p>
			<p>I have only to add, that the proof-sheets of the present edition not having passed through my hands, I am not answerable for any typographical errors that may be found in it. Having, however, been printed at the very accurate press of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Baldwin, I make no doubt it will be found not less perfect than the former edition; the greatest care having been taken, by correctness and elegance to do justice to one of the most instructive and entertaining works in the English language.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Edmond Malone.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-80" id="noteref-80" epub:type="noteref">80</a></p>
				<p><time datetime="1799-04-08">April 8, 1799</time>.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
