<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
	"http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
	<title></title>
	<meta name="generator" content="BBEdit 14.0" />
</head>
<body>
<h2>FOOTNOTES:</h2>

<p>[1] Had he been 'busily employed' he would, no doubt, have finished the
edition in a few months. He himself had recorded at Easter, 1765: 'My
time has been unprofitably spent, and seems as a dream that has left
nothing behind.' <i>Pr. and Med</i>., p. 61.</p>

<p>[2] Dedications had been commonly used as a means of getting money by
flattery. I. D'Israeli in his <i>Calamities of Authors</i>, i. 64,
says:—'Fuller's <i>Church History</i> is disgraced by twelve particular
dedications. It was an expedient to procure dedication fees; for
publishing books by subscription was an art not yet discovered.' The
price of the dedication of a play was, he adds, in the time of George I,
twenty guineas. So much then, at least, Johnson lost by not dedicating
<i>Irene</i>. However, when he addressed the <i>Plan of his Dictionary</i> to Lord
Chesterfield (<i>ante</i>, i. 183) he certainly came very near a dedication.
Boswell, in the <i>Hypochondriack</i>, writes:—'For my own part, I own I am
proud enough. But I do not relish the stateliness of not dedicating at
all. I prefer pleasure to pride, and it appears to me that there is much
pleasure in honestly expressing one's admiration, esteem, or affection
in a public manner, and in thus contributing to the happiness of another
by making him better pleased with himself.' <i>London Mag</i>. for 1782, p.
454. His dedications were dedications of friendship, not of flattery or
servility. He dedicated his <i>Tour to Corsica</i> to Paoli, his <i>Tour to the
Hebrides</i> to Malone, and his <i>Life of Johnson</i> to Sir Joshua Reynolds.
Goldsmith, in like manner, distrest though he so often was, dedicated
his <i>Traveller</i> to his brother, the <i>Deserted Village</i> to Sir Joshua,
and <i>She Stoops to Conquer</i> to Johnson.</p>

<p>[3] A passage in Boswell's letter to Malone of Jan. 29, 1791 (Croker's
<i>Boswell</i>, p. 829), shows that it is Reynolds of whom he is writing. 'I
am,' he writes, 'to cancel a leaf of the first volume, having found that
though Sir Joshua certainly assured me he had no objection to my
mentioning that Johnson wrote a dedication for him, he now thinks
otherwise. In that leaf occurs the mention of Johnson having written to
Dr. Leland, thanking the University of Dublin for their diploma.' In the
first edition, this mention of the letter is followed by the passage
above about dedications. It was no doubt Reynolds's <i>Dedication of his
Discourses</i> to the King in the year 1778 that Johnson wrote. The first
sentence is in a high degree Johnsonian. 'The regular progress of
cultivated life is from necessaries to accommodations, from
accommodations to ornaments.'</p>

<p>[4] 'That is to say,' he added, 'to the last generation of the Royal
Family.' See <i>post</i>, April 15, 1773. We may hope that the Royal Family
were not all like the Duke of Gloucester, who, when Gibbon brought him
the second volume of the <i>Decline and Fall</i>, 'received him with much
good nature and affability, saying to him, as he laid the quarto on the
table, "Another d——d thick, square book! Always scribble, scribble,
scribble! Eh! Mr. Gibbon?"' Best's <i>Memorials</i>, p. 68.</p>

<p>[5] Such care was needless. Boswell complained (<i>post</i>, June 24, 1774),
that Johnson did not <i>answer</i> his letters, but only sent him <i>returns</i>.</p>

<p>[6] 'On one of the days that my ague disturbed me least, I walked from
the convent to Corte, purposely to write a letter to Mr. Samuel Johnson.
I told my revered friend, that from a kind of superstition agreeable in
a certain degree to him as well as to myself, I had, during my travels,
written to him from Loca Solennia, places in some measure sacred. That,
as I had written to him from the tomb of Melancthon (see <i>post</i>, June
28, 1777), sacred to learning and piety, I now wrote to him from the
palace of Pascal Paoli, sacred to wisdom and liberty.' Boswell's <i>Tour
to Corsica</i>, p. 218. How delighted would Boswell have been had he lived
to see the way in which he is spoken of by the biographer of Paoli: 'En
traversant la Méditerranée sur de frêles navires pour venir s'asseoir au
foyer de la nationalité Corse, <i>des hommes graves</i> tels que Boswel et
Volney obéissaient sans doute à un sentiment bien plus élevé qu' au
besoin vulgaire d'une puerile curiosité.' <i>Histoire de Pascal Paoli</i>,
par A. Arrighi, i. 231. By every Corsican of any education the name of
Boswell is known and honoured. One of them told me that it was in
Boswell's pages that Paoli still lived for them. He informed me also of
a family which still preserved by tradition the remembrance of Boswell's
visit to their ancestral home.</p>

<p>[7] The twelve following lines of this letter were published by Boswell
in his <i>Corsica</i> (p. 219) without Johnson's leave. (See <i>post</i>, March
23, 1768.) Temple, to whom the book had been shewn before publication,
had, it should seem, advised Boswell to omit this extract. Boswell
replied:—'Your remarks are of great service to me … but I must have
my great preceptor, Mr. Johnson, introduced.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p.
122. In writing to excuse himself to Johnson (<i>post</i>, April 26, 1768),
he says, 'the temptation to publishing it was so strong.'</p>

<p>[8] 'Tell your Court,' said Paoli to Boswell, 'what you have seen here.
They will be curious to ask you. A man come from Corsica will be like a
man come from the Antipodes.' Boswell's <i>Corsica</i>, p. 188. He was not
indeed the first 'native of this country' to go there. He found in
Bastia 'an English woman of Penrith, in Cumberland. When the Highlanders
marched through that country in the year 1745, she had married a soldier
of the French picquets in the very midst of all the confusion and
danger, and when she could hardly understand one word he said.' <i>Ib</i>, p.
226. Boswell nowhere quotes Mrs. Barbauld's fine lines on Corsica.
Perhaps he was ashamed of the praise of the wife of 'a little
Presbyterian parson who kept an infant boarding school.' (See <i>post</i>,
under Dec. 17, 1775.) Yet he must have been pleased when he read:—</p>

<p>'Such were the working thoughts which swelled the breast<br/>

Of generous Boswell; when with nobler aim<br/>

And views beyond the narrow beaten track<br/>

By trivial fancy trod, he turned his course<br/>

From polished Gallia's soft delicious vales,' &amp;c.<br/>
</p>

<p>Mrs. Barbauld's <i>Poems</i>, i. 2.</p>

<p>[9] Murphy, in the <i>Monthly Review</i>, lxxvi. 376, thus describes
Johnson's life in Johnson's Court after he had received his pension.
'His friend Levett, his physician in ordinary, paid his daily visits
with assiduity; attended at all hours, made tea all the morning, talked
what he had to say, and did not expect an answer; or, if occasion
required it, was mute, officious, and ever complying…. There Johnson
sat every morning, receiving visits, hearing the topics of the day, and
indolently trifling away the time. Chymistry afforded some amusement.'
Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 452), says:—'An upper room, which had the
advantages of a good light and free air, he fitted up for a study. A
silver standish and some useful plate, which he had been prevailed on to
accept as pledges of kindness from some who most esteemed him, together
with furniture that would not have disgraced a better dwelling, banished
those appearances of squalid indigence which, in his less happy days,
disgusted those who came to see him.' Some of the plate Johnson had
bought. See <i>post</i>, April 15, 1781.</p>

<p>[10] It is remarkable, that Mr. Gray has employed somewhat the same
image to characterise Dryden. He, indeed, furnishes his car with but two
horses, but they are of 'ethereal race':</p>

<p>'Behold where Dryden's less presumptuous car,<br/>

Wide o'er the fields of glory bear<br/>

Two coursers of ethereal race,<br/>

With necks in thunder cloath'd, and long resounding pace.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Ode on the Progress of Poesy</i>. BOSWELL. In the '<i>Life of Pope (Works</i>,
viii. 324) Johnson says:—'The style of Dryden is capricious and varied;
that of Pope is cautious and uniform. Dryden obeys the motions of his
own mind; Pope constrains his mind to his own rules of composition.
Dryden is sometimes vehement and rapid; Pope is always smooth, uniform,
and gentle.'</p>

<p>[11] In the original <i>laws or kings</i>.</p>

<p>[12]</p>

<p>'The mind is its own place, and in itself<br/>

Can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Paradise Lost</i>, i. 254.</p>

<p>'Caelum, non animum, mutant qui
trans mare current.'</p>

<p>Horace, <i>Epis</i>. i. II. 27. See also <i>ante</i>, i. 381. note 2.</p>

<p>[13] 'I once inadvertently put him,' wrote Reynolds, 'in a situation
from which none but a man of perfect integrity could extricate himself.
I pointed at some lines in <i>The Traveller</i> which I told him I was sure
he wrote. He hesitated a little; during this hesitation I recollected
myself, that, as I knew he would not lie, I put him in a cleft-stick,
and should have had but my due if he had given me a rough answer; but he
only said, 'Sir, I did not write them, but that you may not imagine that
I have wrote more than I really have, the utmost I have wrote in that
poem, to the best of my recollection, is not more than eighteen lines.
[Nine seems the actual number.] It must be observed there was then an
opinion about town that Dr. Johnson wrote the whole poem for his friend,
who was then in a manner an unknown writer.' Taylor's <i>Reynolds</i>, ii.
458. See also <i>post</i>, April 9, 1778. For each line of <i>The Traveller</i>
Goldsmith was paid 11-1/4d. (<i>ante</i>, i. 193, note), Johnson's present,
therefore, of nine lines was, if reckoned in money, worth 8/5-1/4.</p>

<p>[14] See <i>ante</i>, i. 194, note.</p>

<p>[15] <i>Respublica et Status Regni Hungariae. Ex Officina Elzeviriana</i>,
1634, p. 136. This work belongs to the series of <i>Republics</i> mentioned
by Johnson, <i>post</i>, under April 29, 1776.</p>

<p>[16] '"Luke" had been taken simply for the euphony of the line. He was
one of two brothers, Dosa…. The origin of the mistake [of Zeck for
Dosa] is curious. The two brothers belonged to one of the native races
of Transylvania called Szeklers or Zecklers, which descriptive addition
follows their names in the German biographical authorities; and this,
through abridgment and misapprehension, in subsequent books came at last
to be substituted for the family name.' Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 370.
The iron crown was not the worst of the tortures inflicted.</p>

<p>[17] See <i>post</i>, April 15, 1781. In 1748 Johnson had written (<i>Works</i>,
v. 231): 'At a time when so many schemes of education have been
projected…. so many schools opened for general knowledge, and so many
lectures in particular sciences attended.' Goldsmith, in his <i>Life of
Nash</i> (published in 1762), describes the lectures at Bath 'on the arts
and sciences which are frequently taught there in a pretty, superficial
manner so as not to tease the understanding while they afford the
imagination some amusement.' Cunningham's <i>Goldsmith's Works</i>, iv 59.</p>

<p>[18] Perhaps Gibbon had read this passage at the time when he wrote in
his Memoirs:—'It has indeed been observed, nor is the observation
absurd, that, excepting in experimental sciences which demand a costly
apparatus and a dexterous hand, the many valuable treatises that have
been published on every subject of learning may now supersede the
ancient mode of oral instruction.' Gibbon's <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 50. See
<i>post</i>, March 20, 1776, note.</p>

<p>[19] See <i>ante</i>, i. 103.</p>

<p>[20] Baretti was in Italy at the same time as Boswell. That they met
seems to be shewn by a passage in Boswell's letter (<i>post</i>, Nov. 6,
1766). Malone wrote of him:—'He appears to be an infidel.' Prior's
<i>Malone</i>, p. 399.</p>

<p>[21] Lord Charlemont records (<i>Life</i>, i. 235) that 'Mrs. Mallet, meeting
Hume at an assembly, boldly accosted him in these words:—"Mr. Hume,
give me leave to introduce myself to you; we deists ought to know each
other." "Madame," replied Hume, "I am no deist. I do not style myself
so, neither do I desire to be known by that appellation."' Hume, in 1763
or 1764, wrote to Dr. Blair about the men of letters at Paris:—'It
would give you and Robertson great satisfaction to find that there is
not a single deist among them.' J. H. Burton's <i>Hume</i>, ii. 181. There
was no deist, I suppose, because they were all atheists. Romilly
(<i>Life</i>, i. 179) records the following anecdote, which he had from
Diderot in 1781:—'Hume dìna avec une grande compagnie chez le Baron
d'Holbach. Il était assis à côté du Baron; on parla de la religion
naturelle. "Pour les Athées," disait Hume, "je ne crois pas qu'il en
existe; je n'en ai jamais vu." "Vous avez été un peu malheureux,"
répondit l'autre, "vous voici à table avec dix-sept pour la première
fois."' It was on the same day that Diderot related this that he said to
Romilly, 'Il faut <i>sabrer</i> la théologie.'</p>

<p>[22] 'The inference upon the whole is, that it is not from the value or
worth of the object which any person pursues that we can determine his
enjoyment; but merely from the passion with which he pursues it, and the
success which he meets with in his pursuit. Objects have absolutely no
worth or value in themselves. They derive their worth merely from the
passion. If that be strong and steady and successful, the person is
happy. It cannot reasonably be doubted but a little miss, dressed in a
new gown for a dancing-school ball, receives as complete enjoyment as
the greatest orator, who triumphs in the splendour of his eloquence,
while he governs the passions and resolutions of a numerous assembly.'
Hume's <i>Essays</i>, i. 17 (<i>The Sceptic</i>). Pope had written in the <i>Essay
on Man</i> (iv. 57):</p>

<p>'Condition, circumstance, is not the thing;<br/>

Bliss is the same in subject or in King.'<br/>
</p>

<p>See also <i>post</i>, April 15, 1778.</p>

<p>[23] In <i>Boswelliana</i>, p. 220, a brief account is given of his life,
which was not altogether uneventful.</p>

<p>[24] We may compare with this what he says in <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 21,
about the 'cowardice which always encroaches fast upon such as spend
their time in the company of persons higher than themselves.' In No. 104
he writes:—'It is dangerous for mean minds to venture themselves within
the sphere of greatness.' In the court that Boswell many years later
paid to Lord Lonsdale, he suffered all the humiliations that the
brutality of this petty greatness can inflict. <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p.
324. See also <i>post</i>, Sept. 22, 1777.</p>

<p>[25] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 19, 1773.</p>

<p>[26] Johnson (<i>Works</i>, ix. 107) thus sums up his examination of
second-sight:—'There is against it, the seeming analogy of things
confusedly seen, and little understood; and for it, the indistinct cry
of natural persuasion, which may be, perhaps, resolved at last into
prejudice and tradition. I never could advance my curiosity to
conviction; but came away at last only willing to believe.' See also
<i>post</i>, March 24, 1775. Hume said of the evidence in favour of
second-sight—:'As finite added to finite never approaches a hair's
breadth nearer to infinite, so a fact incredible in itself acquires not
the smallest accession of probability by the accumulation of testimony.'
J. H. Burton's Hume, i. 480.</p>

<p>[27] 'I love anecdotes,' said Johnson. Boswell's <i>Hebridge</i>, Aug. 16,
1773. Boswell said that 'Johnson always condemned the word <i>anecdotes</i>,
as used in the sense that the French, and we from them, use it, as
signifying particulars.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 311. In his
<i>Dictionary</i>, he defined '<i>Anecdotes</i> Something yet unpublished; secret
history.' In the fourth edition he added: 'It is now used, after the
French, for a biographical incident; a minute passage of private life.'</p>

<p>[28] See <i>ante</i>, July 19, 1763.</p>

<p>[29] Boswell, writing to Wilkes in 1776, said:—'Though we differ widely
in religion and politics, <i>il y a des points ou nos ames sont animes</i>,
as Rouseau said to me in his wild retreat.' Almon's <i>Wilkes</i>, iv. 319.</p>

<p>[30] Rousseau fled from France in 1762. A few days later his arrest was
ordered at Geneva. He fled from Neufchatel in 1763, and soon afterwards
he was banished from Berne. <i>Nonev. Biog. Gen., Xlii. 750</i>. He had come
to England with David Hume a few weeks before this conversation was
held, and was at this time in Chiswick. Hume's <i>Private Corres</i>.,
pp. 125, 145.</p>

<p>[31] Rousseau had by this time published his <i>Nouvelle Helloise</i> and
<i>Emile</i>.</p>

<p>[32] Less than three months after the date of this conversation Rousseau
wrote to General Conway, one of the Secretaries of State, thanking him
for the pension which George III proposed secretly to confer on him.
Hume's <i>Private Corres</i>., p. 165. Miss Burney, in her preface to
<i>Evelina</i>, a novel which was her introduction to Johnson's strong
affection, mentioning Rousseau and Johnson, adds in a footnote:—
'However superior the capacities in which these great writers deserve to
be considered, they must pardon me that, for the dignity of my subject,
I here rank the authors of <i>Rasselas</i> and <i>Eloïse</i> as novelists.'</p>

<p>[33] Rousseau thus wrote of himself:</p>

<p>'Dieu est juste; il veut que je souffre; et il sait que je suis
innocent. Voilà le motif de ma confiance, mon coeur et ma raison me
crient qu'elle ne me trompera pas. Laissons donc faire les hommes et la
destinée; apprenons à souffrir sans murmure; tout doit à la fin rentrer
dans Fordre, et mon tour viendra tôt ou tard.' Rousseau's <i>Works</i>,
xx. 223.</p>

<p>[34] 'He entertained me very courteously,' wrote Boswell in his
<i>Corsica</i>, p. 140.</p>

<p>[35] In this preference Boswell pretended at times to share. See <i>post</i>,
Sept. 30, 1769.</p>

<p>[36] Johnson seems once to have held this view to some extent; for,
writing of Savage's poem <i>On Public Spirit</i>, he says (<i>Works</i>, viii.
156):—'He has asserted the natural equality of mankind, and endeavoured
to suppress that pride which inclines men to imagine that right is the
consequence of power.' See also <i>post</i>, Sept. 23, 1777, where he
asserts:—'It is impossible not to conceive that men in their original
state were equal.' For the opposite opinion, see <i>ante</i>, June 25, 1763.</p>

<p>[37] 'Qui mores hominum multorum vidit et urbes.' 'Manners and towns of
various nations viewed.' FRANCIS. Horace, <i>Ars Poetica</i>, 1. 142.</p>

<p>[38] By the time Boswell was twenty-six years old he could boast that he
had made the acquaintance of Voltaire, Rousseau, and Paoli among
foreigners; and of Adam Smith, Robertson, Hume, Johnson, Goldsmith,
Garrick, Horace Walpole, Wilkes, and perhaps Reynolds, among Englishmen.
He had twice at least received a letter from the Earl of Chatham.</p>

<p>[39] In such passages as this we may generally assume that the
gentleman, whose name is not given, is Boswell himself. See <i>ante</i>, i.
4, and <i>post</i>, Oct. 16, 1769.</p>

<p>[40] See <i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton's 'Collection,' where this
assertion is called 'his usual remark.'</p>

<p>[41] See <i>post</i>, April 15, 1778.</p>

<p>[42] These two words may be observed as marks of Mr. Boswell's accuracy.
It is a jocular Irish phrase, which, of all Johnson's acquaintances, no
one probably, but Goldsmith, would have used.—CROKER.</p>

<p>[43] See <i>ante</i>, May 24, 1763.</p>

<p>[44] Johnson's best justification for the apparent indolences of the
latter part of his life may be found in his own words: 'Every man of
genius has some arts of fixing the attention peculiar to himself, by
which, honestly exerted, he may benefit mankind…. To the position of
Tully, that if virtue could be seen she must be loved, may be added,
that if truth could be heard she must be obeyed.' <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 87.
He fixed the attention best by his talk. For 'the position of Tully,'
see <i>post</i>, March 19, 1776.</p>

<p>[45] See <i>ante</i>, i. 192, and <i>post</i>, May 1, 1783. Goldsmith wrote <i>The
Traveller and Deserted Village</i> on a very different plan. 'To save
himself the trouble of transcription, he wrote the lines in his first
copy very wide, and would so fill up the intermediate space with
reiterated corrections, that scarcely a word of his first effusions was
left unaltered.' Goldsmith's <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 113.</p>

<p>[46] Mrs. Thrale in a letter to Dr. Johnson, said:—'Don't sit making
verses that never will be written.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 183. Baretti
noted opposite this in the margin of his copy: 'Johnson was always
making Latin or English verses in his mind, but never would write
them down.'</p>

<p>[47] Burke entered Parliament as member for Wendover borough on Jan.
14th, 1766. William Burke, writing to Barry the artist on the following
March 23, says:—'Ned's success has exceeded our most sanguine hopes;
all at once he has darted into fame. He is full of real business, intent
upon doing real good to his country, as much as if he was to receive
twenty per cent. from the commerce of the whole empire, which he labours
to improve and extend.' Barry's <i>Works</i>, i. 42.</p>

<p>[48] It was of these speeches that Macaulay wrote:—'The House of
Commons heard Pitt for the last time and Burke for the first time, and
was in doubt to which of them the palm of eloquence should be assigned.
It was indeed a splendid sunset and a splendid dawn.' Macaulay's
<i>Essays</i> (edition 1874), iv. 330.</p>

<p>[49] See <i>post</i>, March 20, 1776.</p>

<p>[50] Boswell has already stated (<i>ante</i>, Oct. 1765) that Johnson's
<i>Shakespeare</i> was 'virulently attacked' by Kenrick. No doubt there were
other attacks and rejoinders too.</p>

<p>[51] Two days earlier he had drawn up a prayer on entering <i>Novum
Museum</i>. <i>Pr. and Med</i>., p. 69.</p>

<p>[52] See <i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton's Collection.</p>

<p>[53] <i>Dictionarium Saxonico et Gothico-Latinum</i>. London, 1772. Lye died
in 1767. O. Manning completed the work.</p>

<p>[54] See Appendix A.</p>

<p>[55] Mr. Langton's uncle. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[56] The place of residence of Mr. Peregrine Langton. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[57] Mr. Langton did not disregard this counsel, but wrote the following
account, which he has been pleased to communicate to me:</p>

<p>'The circumstances of Mr. Peregrine Langton were these. He had an
annuity for life of two hundred pounds <i>per annum</i>. He resided in a
village in Lincolnshire; the rent of his house, with two or three small
fields, was twenty-eight pounds; the county he lived in was not more
than moderately cheap; his family consisted of a sister, who paid him
eighteen pounds annually for her board, and a niece. The servants were
two maids, and two men in livery. His common way of living, at his
table, was three or four dishes; the appurtenances to his table were
neat and handsome; he frequently entertained company at dinner, and then
his table was well served with as many dishes as were usual at the
tables of the other gentlemen in the neighbourhood. His own appearance,
as to clothes, was genteelly neat and plain. He had always a
post-chaise, and kept three horses.</p>

<p>'Such, with the resources I have mentioned, was his way of living, which
he did not suffer to employ his whole income: for he had always a sum of
money lying by him for any extraordinary expences that might arise. Some
money he put into the stocks; at his death, the sum he had there
amounted to one hundred and fifty pounds. He purchased out of his income
his household-furniture and linen, of which latter he had a very ample
store; and, as I am assured by those that had very good means of
knowing, not less than the tenth part of his income was set apart for
charity: at the time of his death, the sum of twenty-five pounds was
found, with a direction to be employed in such uses.</p>

<p>'He had laid down a plan of living proportioned to his income, and did
not practise any extraordinary degree of parsimony, but endeavoured that
in his family there should be plenty without waste; as an instance that
this was his endeavour, it may be worth while to mention a method he
took in regulating a proper allowance of malt liquor to be drunk in his
family, that there might not be a deficiency, or any intemperate
profusion: On a complaint made that his allowance of a hogshead in a
month, was not enough for his own family, he ordered the quantity of a
hogshead to be put into bottles, had it locked up from the servants, and
distributed out, every day, eight quarts, which is the quantity each day
at one hogshead in a month; and told his servants, that if that did not
suffice, he would allow them more; but, by this method, it appeared at
once that the allowance was much more than sufficient for his small
family; and this proved a clear conviction, that could not be answered,
and saved all future dispute. He was, in general, very diligently and
punctually attended and obeyed by his servants; he was very considerate
as to the injunctions he gave, and explained them distinctly; and, at
their first coming to his service, steadily exacted a close compliance
with them, without any remission; and the servants finding this to be
the case, soon grew habitually accustomed to the practice of their
business, and then very little further attention was necessary. On
extraordinary instances of good behaviour, or diligent service, he was
not wanting in particular encouragements and presents above their wages;
it is remarkable that he would permit their relations to visit them, and
stay at his house two or three days at a time.</p>

<p>'The wonder, with most that hear an account of his Åconomy, will be, how
he was able, with such an income, to do so much, especially when it is
considered that he paid for everything he had; he had no land, except
the two or three small fields which I have said he rented; and, instead
of gaining any thing by their produce, I have reason to think he lost by
them; however, they furnished him with no further assistance towards his
housekeeping, than grass for his horses, (not hay, for that I know he
bought,) and for two cows. Every Monday morning he settled his family
accounts, and so kept up a constant attention to the confining his
expences within his income; and to do it more exactly, compared those
expences with a computation he had made, how much that income would
afford him every week and day of the year. One of his Åconomical
practices was, as soon as any repair was wanting in or about his house,
to have it immediately performed. When he had money to spare, he chose
to lay in a provision of linen or clothes, or any other necessaries; as
then, he said, he could afford it, which he might not be so well able to
do when the actual want came; in consequence of which method, he had a
considerable supply of necessary articles lying by him, beside what was
in use.</p>

<p>'But the main particular that seems to have enabled him to do so much
with his income, was, that he paid for every thing as soon as he had it,
except, alone, what were current accounts, such as rent for his house
and servantsâ wages; and these he paid at the stated times with the
utmost exactness. He gave notice to the tradesmen of the neighbouring
market-towns that they should no longer have his custom, if they let any
of his servants have anything without their paying for it. Thus he put
it out of his power to commit those imprudences to which those are
liable that defer their payments by using their money some other way
than where it ought to go. And whatever money he had by him, he knew
that it was not demanded elsewhere, but that he might safely employ it
as he pleased.</p>

<p>'His example was confined, by the sequestered place of his abode, to the
observation of few, though his prudence and virtue would have made it
valuable to all who could have known it. These few particulars, which I
knew myself, or have obtained from those who lived with him, may afford
instruction, and be an incentive to that wise art of living, which he so
successfully practiced.â BOSWELL</p>

<p>[58] Of his being in the chair of THE LITERARY CLUB, which at this time
met once a week in the evening. BOSWELL. See <i>ante</i>, Feb. 1764, note.</p>

<p>[59] See <i>post</i>, Feb. 1767, where he told the King that 'he must now
read to acquire more knowledge.'</p>

<p>[60] The passage omitted alluded to a private transaction. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[61] The censure of my Latin relates to the Dedication, which was as
follows:</p>

<h5>   VIRO NOBILISSIMO, ORNATISSIMO,
              JOANNI,
     VICECOMITI MOUNTSTUART,
      ATAVIS EDITO REGIBUS
  EXCELSAE FAMILLAE DE BUTE SPEI ALTERAE;
           LABENTE SECULO,
       QUUM HOMINES NULLIUS ORIGINIS
      GENUS AEQUARE OPIBUS AGGREDIUNTUR,
        SANGUINIS ANTIQUI ET ILLUSTRIS
            SEMPER MEMORI,
  NATALIUM SPLENDOREM VIRTUTIBUS AUGENTI:</h5>

<h5>      AD PUBLICA POPULI COMITIA
           JAM LEGATO;</h5>

<h5> IN OPTIMATIUM VERO MAGNÃ BRITANNIÃ SENATU,
          JURE HÃREDITARIO,
           OLIM CONSESSURO:</h5>

<h5>    VIM INSITAM VARIA DOCTRINA PROMOVENTE,
        NEC TAMEN SE VENDITANTE,
                PRÃDITO:</h5>

<h5>      PRISCA FIDE, ANIMO LIBERRIMO,
          ET MORUM ELEGANTIA
              INSIGNI:</h5>

<h5>       IN ITALIÃ VISITANDÃ ITINERE,
          SOCIO SUO HONORATISSIMO,
       HASCE JURISPRUDENTÃ PRIMITIAS
    DEVINCTISSIMÃ AMICITIÃ ET OBSERVANTIÃ
              MONUMENTUM,
                D. D. C Q.</h5>

<h5>JACOBUS BOSWELL. BOSWELL.</h5>

<p>[62] See <i>ante</i>, i. 211.</p>

<p>[63] See <i>post</i>, May 19, 1778.</p>

<p>[64] This alludes to the first sentence of the <i>Proæmium</i> of my Thesis.
'JURISPRUDENTÃ studio nullum uberius, nullum generosius: in legibus enim
agitandis, populorum mores, variasque fortunæ vices ex quibus leges
oriuntur, contemplari simul solemus_' BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[65] 'Mr. Boswell,' says Malone, 'professed the Scotch and the English
law; but had never taken very great pains on the subject. His father,
Lord Auchinleck, told him one day, that it would cost him more trouble
to hide his ignorance in these professions than to show his knowledge.
This Boswell owned he had found to be true.' <i>European Magazine</i>, 1798,
p. 376. Boswell wrote to Temple in 1775:—'You are very kind in saying
that I may overtake you in learning. Believe me though that I have a
kind of impotency of study.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 181.</p>

<p>[66] This is a truth that Johnson often enforced. 'Very few,' said the
poet; 'live by choice: every man is placed in his present condition by
causes which acted without his foresight, and with which he did not
always willingly co-operate.' <i>Rasselas</i>, chap. 16. 'To him that lives
well,' answered the hermit, 'every form of life is good; nor can I give
any other rule for choice than to remove from all apparent evil.' <i>Ib</i>,
chap. 21. 'Young man,' said Omar, 'it is of little use to form plans of
life.' <i>The Idler</i>, No. 101.</p>

<p>[67] 'Hace sunt quae nostra <i>liceat</i> te voce moneri.' <i>Aeneid</i>, iii.
461.</p>

<p>[68] The passage omitted explained the transaction to which the
preceding letter had alluded. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[69] See <i>ante</i>, June 10, 1761.</p>

<p>[70] Mr. Croker says:—'It was by visiting Chambers, when a fellow of
University College, that Johnson became acquainted with Lord Stowell [at
that time William Scott]; and when Chambers went to India, Lord Stowell,
as he expressed it to me, seemed to succeed to his place in Johnson's
friendship.' Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 90, note. John Scott (Earl of
Eldon), Sir William Jones and Mr. Windham, were also members of
University College. The hall is adorned with the portraits of these five
men. An engraving of Johnson is in the Common Room.</p>

<p>[71] It is not easy to discover anything noble or even felicitous in
this Dedication. <i>Works</i>, v. 444.</p>

<p>[72] See <i>ante</i>, i. 148.</p>

<p>[73] See <i>ante</i>, i. 177, note 2.</p>

<p>[74] See <i>ante</i>, i. 158.</p>

<p>[75] See <i>ante</i>, i. 178, note 2.</p>

<p>[76] This poem is scarcely Johnson's, though all the lines but the third
in the following couplets may be his.</p>

<p>Whose life not sunk in sloth is free from care,<br/>

Nor tost by change, nor stagnant in despair;<br/>

Who with wise authors pass the instructive day<br/>

And wonder how the moments stole away;<br/>

Who not retired beyond the sight of life<br/>

Behold its weary cares, its noisy strife.'<br/>
</p>

<p>[77] Johnson's additions to these three poems are not at all evident.</p>

<p>[78] In a note to the poem it is stated that Miss Williams, when, before
her blindness, she was assisting Mr. Grey in his experiments, was the
first that observed the emission of the electrical spark from a human
body. The best lines are the following:—</p>

<p>Now, hoary Sage, purse thy happy flight,<br/>

With swifter motion haste to purer light,<br/>

Where Bacon waits with Newton and with Boyle<br/>

To hail thy genius, and applaud thy toil;<br/>

Where intuition breaks through time and space,<br/>

And mocks experiment's successive race;<br/>

Sees tardy Science toil at Nature's laws,<br/>

And wonders how th' effect obscures the cause.<br/>

Yet not to deep research or happy guess<br/>

Is owed the life of hope, the death of peace.'<br/>
</p>

<p>[79] A gentleman, writing from Virginia to John Wesley, in 1735, about
the need of educating the negro slaves in religion, says:—'Their
masters generally neglect them, as though immortality was not the
privilege of their souls in common with their own.' Wesley's <i>Journal</i>,
II. 288. But much nearer home Johnson might have found this criminal
enforcement of ignorance. Burke, writing in 1779, about the Irish,
accuses the legislature of 'condemning a million and a half of people to
ignorance, according to act of parliament.' Burke's <i>Corres</i>. ii. 294.</p>

<p>[80] See <i>post</i>, March 21, 1775, and Appendix.</p>

<p>[81] Johnson said very finely:—'Languages are the pedigree of nations.'
Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 18, 1773.</p>

<p>[82] The Rev. Mr. John Campbell, Minister of the Parish of Kippen, near
Stirling, who has lately favoured me with a long, intelligent, and very
obliging letter upon this work, makes the following remark:—'Dr.
Johnson has alluded to the worthy man employed in the translation of the
New Testament. Might not this have afforded you an opportunity of paying
a proper tribute of respect to the memory of the Rev. Mr. James Stuart,
late Minister of Killin, distinguished by his eminent Piety, Learning
and Taste? The amiable simplicity of his life, his warm benevolence, his
indefatigable and successful exertions for civilizing and improving the
Parish of which he was Minister for upwards of fifty years, entitle him
to the gratitude of his country, and the veneration of all good men. It
certainly would be a pity, if such a character should be permitted to
sink into oblivion.' BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[83] Seven years later Johnson received from the Society some religious
works in Erse. See post, June 24, 1774. Yet in his journey to the
Hebrides, in 1773 (Works, ix. 101), he had to record of the parochial
schools in those islands that 'by the rule of their institution they
teach <i>only</i> English, so that the natives read a language which they may
never use or understand,'</p>

<p>[84] This paragraph shews Johnson's real estimation of the character and
abilities of the celebrated Scottish Historian, however lightly, in a
moment of caprice, he may have spoken of his works. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[85] See <i>ante</i>, i. 210.</p>

<p>[86] This is the person concerning whom Sir John Hawkins has thrown out
very unwarrantable reflections both against Dr. Johnson and Mr. Francis
Barber. BOSWELL. See <i>post</i>, under Oct. 20, 1784. In 1775, Heely, it
appears, applied through Johnson for the post that was soon to be vacant
of 'master of the tap' at Ranelagh House. 'He seems,' wrote Johnson, in
forwarding his letter of application, 'to have a genius for an
alehouse.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 210. See also <i>post</i>, Aug. 12, 1784.</p>

<p>[87] See an account of him in the <i>European Magazine</i>, Jan. 1786.
BOSWELL. There we learn that he was in his time a grammar-school usher,
actor, poet, the puffing partner in a quack medicine, and tutor to a
youthful Earl. He was suspected of levying blackmail by threats of
satiric publications, and he suffered from a disease which rendered him
an object almost offensive to sight. He was born in 1738 or 1739, and
died in 1771.</p>

<p>[88] It was republished in <i>The Repository</i>, ii. 227, edition of 1790.</p>

<p>[89] The Hon. Thomas Hervey, whose <i>Letter to Sir Thomas Hanmer</i> in 1742
was much read at that time. He was the second son of John, first Earl of
Bristol, and one of the brothers of Johnson's early friend Henry Hervey.
He died Jan. 20, 1775. MALONE. See <i>post</i>, April 6, 1775.</p>

<p>[90] See <i>post</i>, under Sept. 22, 1777, for another story told by
Beauclerk against Johnson of a Mr. Hervey.</p>

<p>[91] Essays published in the <i>Daily Gazetteer</i> and afterwards collected
into two vols. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for 1748, P. 48.</p>

<p>[92] Mr. Croker regrets that Johnson employed his pen for hire in
Hervey's 'disgusting squabbles,' and in a long note describes Hervey's
letter to Sir Thomas Hanmer with whose wife he had eloped. But the
attack to which Johnson was hired to reply was not made by Hanmer, but,
as was supposed, by Sir C. H. Williams. Because a man has wronged
another, he is not therefore to submit to the attacks of a third.
Williams, moreover, it must be remembered, was himself a man of
licentious character.</p>

<p>[93] Buckingham House, bought in 1761, by George III, and settled on
Queen Charlotte. The present Buckingham Palace occupies the site. P.
CUNNINGHAM. Here, according to Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 470), Johnson met the
Prince of Wales (George IV.) when a child, 'and enquired as to his
knowledge of the Scriptures; the prince in his answers gave him great
satisfaction.' Horace Walpole, writing of the Prince at the age of
nineteen, says (<i>Journal of the Reign of George III</i>, ii.
503):—'Nothing was coarser than his conversation and phrases; and it
made men smile to find that in the palace of piety and pride his Royal
Highness had learnt nothing but the dialect of footmen and grooms.'</p>

<p>[94] Dr. Johnson had the honour of contributing his assistance towards
the formation of this library; for I have read a long letter from him to
Mr. Barnard, giving the most masterly instructions on the subject. I
wished much to have gratified my readers with the perusal of this
letter, and have reason to think that his Majesty would have been
graciously pleased to permit its publication; but Mr. Barnard, to whom I
applied, declined it 'on his own account.' BOSWELL. It is given in Mr.
Croker's edition, p. 196.</p>

<p>[95] The particulars of this conversation I have been at great pains to
collect with the utmost authenticity from Dr. Johnson's own detail to
myself; from Mr. Langton who was present when he gave an account of it
to Dr. Joseph Warton, and several other friends, at Sir Joshua
Reynolds's; from Mr. Barnard; from the copy of a letter written by the
late Mr. Strahan the printer, to Bishop Warburton; and from a minute,
the original of which is among the papers of the late Sir James
Caldwell, and a copy of which was most obligingly obtained for me from
his son Sir John Caldwell, by Sir Francis Lumm. To all these gentlemen I
beg leave to make my grateful acknowledgements, and particularly to Sir
Francis Lumm, who was pleased to take a great deal of trouble, and even
had the minute laid before the King by Lord Caermarthen, now Duke of
Leeds, then one of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, who
announced to Sir Francis the Royal pleasure concerning it by a letter,
in these words: 'I have the King's commands to assure you, Sir, how
sensible his Majesty is of your attention in communicating the minute of
the conversation previous to its publication. As there appears no
objection to your complying with Mr. Boswell's wishes on the subject,
you are at full liberty to deliver it to that gentleman, to make such
use of in his <i>Life of Dr. Johnson</i>, as he may think proper.' BOSWELL.
In 1790, Boswell published in a quarto sheet of eight pages <i>A
conversation between His Most Sacred Majesty George III. and Samuel
Johnson, LLD. Illustrated with Observations. By James Boswell, Esq.
London. Printed by Henry Baldwin, for Charles Dilly in the Poultry.
MDCCXC. Price Half-a-Guinea. Entered in the Hall-Book of the Company of
Stationers</i>. It is of the same impression as the first edition of <i>the
Life of Johnson</i>.</p>

<p>[96] After Michaelmas, 1766. See <i>ante</i>, ii. 25.</p>

<p>[97] See <i>post</i>, May, 31, 1769, note.</p>

<p>[98] Writing to Langton, on May 10, of the year before he had said, 'I
read more than I did. I hope something will yet come on it.' <i>Ante</i>,
ii. 20.</p>

<p>[99] Boswell and Goldsmith had in like manner urged him 'to continue his
labours.' See <i>ante</i>, i. 398, and ii. 15.</p>

<p>[100] Johnson had written to Lord Chesterfield in the <i>Plan of his
Dictionary</i> (<i>Works</i>, v. 19), 'Ausonius thought that modesty forbade him
to plead inability for a task to which Caesar had judged him
equal:—<i>Cur me posse negem posse quod ille pufat</i>?' We may compare also
a passage in Mme. D'Arblay's <i>Diary</i> (ii. 377):—'THE KING. "I believe
there is no constraint to be put upon real genius; nothing but
inclination can set it to work. Miss Burney, however, knows best." And
then hastily returning to me he cried; "What? what?" "No, sir,
I—I—believe not, certainly," quoth I, very awkwardly, for I seemed
taking a violent compliment only as my due; but I knew not how to put
him off as I would another person.'</p>

<p>[101] In one part of the character of Pope (<i>Works</i>, viii. 319), Johnson
seems to be describing himself:—'He certainly was in his early life a
man of great literary curiosity; and when he wrote his <i>Essay on
Criticism</i> had for his age a very wide acquaintance with books. When he
entered into the living world, it seems to have happened to him as to
many others, that he was less attentive to dead masters; he studied in
the academy of Paracelsus, and made the universe his favourite
volume…. His frequent references to history, his allusions to various
kinds of knowledge, and his images selected from art and nature, with
his observations on the operations of the mind and the modes of life,
show an intelligence perpetually on the wing, excursive, vigorous, and
diligent, eager to pursue knowledge, and attentive to retain it.' See
<i>ante</i>, i. 57.</p>

<p>[102] Johnson thus describes Warburton (<i>Works</i>, viii. 288):—'About
this time [1732] Warburton began to make his appearance in the first
ranks of learning. He was a man of vigorous faculties, a mind fervid and
vehement, supplied by incessant and unlimited enquiry, with wonderful
extent and variety of knowledge.' Cradock (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 188) says that
'Bishop Kurd always wondered where it was possible for Warburton to meet
with certain anecdotes with which not only his conversation, but
likewise his writings, abounded. "I could have readily informed him,"
said Mrs. Warburton, "for, when we passed our winters in London, he
would often, after his long and severe studies, send out for a whole
basketful of books from the circulating libraries; and at times I have
gone into his study, and found him laughing, though alone."' Lord
Macaulay was, in this respect, the Warburton of our age.</p>

<p>[103] The Rev. Mr. Strahan clearly recollects having been told by
Johnson, that the King observed that Pope made Warburton a Bishop.
'True, Sir, (said Johnson,) but Warburton did more for Pope; he made him
a Christian:' alluding, no doubt, to his ingenious Comments on the
<i>Essay on Man</i>. BOSWELL. The statements both of the King and Johnson are
supported by two passages in Johnson's <i>Life of Pope</i>, (<i>Works</i>, viii.
289, 290). He says of Warburton's Comments:—'Pope, who probably began
to doubt the tendency of his own work, was glad that the positions, of
which he perceived himself not to know the full meaning, could by any
mode of interpretation be made to mean well…. From this time Pope
lived in the closest intimacy with his commentator, and amply rewarded
his kindness and his zeal; for he introduced him to Mr. Murray, by whose
interest he became preacher at Lincoln's Inn; and to Mr. Allen, who gave
him his niece and his estate, and by consequence a bishoprick.' See also
the account given by Johnson, in Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 21, 1773.
Bishop Law in his Revised Preface to Archbishop King's <i>Origin of Evil</i>
(1781), p. xvii, writes:—'I had now the satisfaction of seeing that
those very principles which had been maintained by Archbishop King were
adopted by Mr. Pope in his Essay on Man; this I used to recollect, and
sometimes relate, with pleasure, conceiving that such an account did no
less honour to the poet than to our philosopher; but was soon made to
understand that anything of that kind was taken highly amiss by one
[Warburton] who had once held the doctrine of that same Essay to be rank
atheism, but afterwards turned a warm advocate for it, and thought
proper to deny the account above-mentioned, with heavy menaces against
those who presumed to insinuate that Pope borrowed anything from any man
whatsoever.' See <i>post</i>, Oct. 10, 1779.</p>

<p>[104] In Gibbon's <i>Memoirs</i>, a fine passage is quoted from Lowth's
Defence of the University of Oxford, against Warburton's reproaches. 'I
transcribe with pleasure this eloquent passage,' writes Gibbon, 'without
inquiring whether in this angry controversy the spirit of Lowth himself
is purified from the intolerant zeal which Warburton had ascribed to the
genius of the place.' Gibbon's <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 47. See BOSWELL'S
<i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 28, 1773.</p>

<p>[105] See <i>post</i>, April 15, 1773, where Johnson says that Lyttelton 'in
his <i>History</i> wrote the most vulgar Whiggism,' and April 10, 1776.
Gibbon, who had reviewed it this year, says in his <i>Memoirs</i> (<i>Misc.
Works</i>, i. 207): 'The public has ratified my judgment of that voluminous
work, in which sense and learning are not illuminated by a ray
of genius.'</p>

<p>[106] Hawkins says of him (<i>Life</i>, p. 211):—'He obtained from one of
those universities which would scarce refuse a degree to an apothecary's
horse a diploma for that of doctor of physic.' He became a great
compiler and in one year earned £1500. In the end he turned
quack-doctor. He was knighted by the King of Sweden 'in return for a
present to that monarch of his <i>Vegetable System</i>.' He at least thrice
attacked Garrick (Murphy's <i>Garrick</i>, pp. 136, 189, 212), who replied
with three epigrams, of which the last is well-known:—</p>

<p>'For Farces and Physic his equal there scarce is;<br/>

 His Farces are Physic, his Physic a Farce is.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Horace Walpole (<i>Letters</i> iii. 372), writing on Jan. 3, 1761,
said:—'Would you believe, what I know is fact, that Dr. Hill earned
fifteen guineas a week by working for wholesale dealers? He was at once
employed on six voluminous works of Botany, Husbandry, &amp;c., published
weekly.' Churchill in the Rescind thus writes of him:—</p>

<p>'Who could so nobly grace the motley list,<br/>

 Actor, Inspector, Doctor, Botanist?<br/>

 Knows any one so well—sure no one knows—<br/>

 At once to play, prescribe, compound, compose?'<br/>
</p>

<p>Churchill's <i>Poems</i>, i. 6. In the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxii. 568, it is stated
that he had acted pantomime, tragedy and comedy, and had been damned
in all.</p>

<p>[107] Mr. Croker quotes Bishop Elrington, who says, 'Dr. Johnson was
unjust to Hill, and showed that <i>he</i> did not understand the subject.'
Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 186.</p>

<p>[108] D'Israeli (<i>Curiosities of Literature</i>, ed. 1834, i. 201) says
that 'Hill, once when he fell sick, owned to a friend that he had
over-fatigued himself with writing seven works at once, one of which was
on architecture and another on cookery.' D'Israeli adds that Hill
contracted to translate a Dutch work on insects for fifty guineas. As he
was ignorant of the language, he bargained with another translator for
twenty-five guineas. This man, who was equally ignorant, rebargained
with a third, who perfectly understood his original, for twelve guineas.</p>

<p>[109] Gibbon (<i>Misc. Works</i>, v. 442), writing on Dec. 20, 1763, of the
<i>Journal des Savans</i>, says:—'I can hardly express how much I am
delighted with this journal; its characteristics are erudition,
precision, and taste…. The father of all the rest, it is still their
superior…. There is nothing to be wished for in it but a little more
boldness and philosophy; but it is published under the Chancellor's eye.'</p>

<p>[110] Goldsmith, in his <i>Present State of Polite Learning</i> (ch. xi.),
published in 1759, says;—'We have two literary reviews in London, with
critical newspapers and magazines without number. The compilers of these
resemble the commoners of Rome, they are all for levelling property, not
by increasing their own, but by diminishing that of others…. The most
diminutive son of fame or of famine has his <i>we</i> and his <i>us</i>, his
<i>firstlys</i> and his <i>secondlys</i>, as methodical as if bound in cow-hide
and closed with clasps of brass. Were these Monthly Reviews and
Magazines frothy, pert, or absurd, they might find some pardon, but to
be dull and dronish is an encroachment on the prerogative of a folio.'</p>

<p>[111] See <i>post</i>, April 10, 1766.</p>

<p>[112] Mr. White, the Librarian of the Royal Society, has, at my request,
kindly examined the records of the Royal Society, but has not been able
to discover what the 'circumstance' was. Neither is any light thrown on
it by Johnson's reviews of Birch's <i>History of the Royal Society</i> and
<i>Philosophical Transactions</i>, vol. xlix. (<i>ante</i>, i. 309), which I
have examined.</p>

<p>[113] 'Were you to converse with a King, you ought to be as easy and
unembarrassed as with your own valet-de-chambre; but yet every look,
word, and action should imply the utmost respect. What would be proper
and well-bred with others much your superior, would be absurd and
ill-bred with one so very much so.' Chesterfield's <i>Letters</i>, iii. 203.</p>

<p>[114] Imlac thus described to Rasselas his interview with the Great
Mogul:—'The emperor asked me many questions concerning my country and
my travels; and though I cannot now recollect anything that he uttered
above the power of a common man, he dismissed me astonished at his
wisdom, and enamoured of his goodness.' <i>Rasselas</i>, chap. ix. Wraxall
(<i>Memoirs</i>, edit. of 1884, i. 283) says that Johnson was no judge of a
fine gentleman. 'George III,' he adds, 'was altogether destitute of
these ornamental and adventitious endowments.' He mentions 'the
oscillations of his body, the precipitation of his questions, none of
which, it was said, would wait for an answer, and the hurry of his
articulation.' Mr. Wheatley, in a note on this passage, quotes the
opinion of 'Adams, the American Envoy, who said, the "King is, I really
think, the most accomplished courtier in his dominions."'</p>

<p>[115] 'Dr. Warton made me a most obsequious bow…. He is what Dr.
Johnson calls a rapturist, and I saw plainly he meant to pour forth much
civility into my ears. He is a very communicative, gay, and pleasant
converser, and enlivened the whole day by his readiness upon all
subjects.' Mme. D'Arblay's <i>Diary</i>, ii. 236. It is very likely that he
is 'the ingenious writer' mentioned <i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton's
'Collection,' of whom Johnson said, 'Sir, he is an enthusiast by rule.'
Mr. Windham records that Johnson, speaking of Warton's admiration of
fine passages, said:—'His taste is amazement' (misprinted <i>amusement</i>).
Windham's <i>Diary</i>, p. 20. In her <i>Memoirs of Dr. Burney</i> (ii. 82), Mme.
D'Arblay says that Johnson 'at times, when in gay spirits, would take
off Dr. Warton with the strongest humour; describing, almost
convulsively, the ecstasy with which he would seize upon the person
nearest to him, to hug in his arms, lest his grasp should be eluded,
while he displayed some picture or some prospect.' In that humourous
piece, <i>Probationary Odes for the Laureateship</i> (p. xliii), Dr. Joseph
is made to hug his brother in his arms, when he sees him descend safely
from the balloon in which he had composed his <i>Ode</i>. Thomas Warton is
described in the same piece (p. 116) as 'a little, thick, squat,
red-faced man.' There was for some time a coolness between Johnson and
Dr. Warton. Warton, writing on Jan. 22, 1766, says:—'I only dined with
Johnson, who seemed cold and indifferent, and scarce said anything to
me; perhaps he has heard what I said of his <i>Shakespeare</i>, or rather was
offended at what I wrote to him—as he pleases.' Wooll's <i>Warton</i>, p.
312. Wooll says that a dispute took place between the two men at
Reynolds's house. 'One of the company overheard the following conclusion
of the dispute. JOHNSON. "Sir, I am not used to be contradicted."
WARTON. "Better for yourself and friends, Sir, if you were; our
admiration could not be increased, but our love might."' <i>Ib</i> p. 98.</p>

<p>[116] <i>The Good-Natured Man</i>, <i>post</i> p. 45.</p>

<p>[117] 'It has been said that the King only sought one interview with Dr.
Johnson. There was nothing to complain of; it was a compliment paid by
rank to letters, and once was enough. The King was more afraid of this
interview than Dr. Johnson was; and went to it as a schoolboy to his
task. But he did not want to have the trial repeated every day, nor was
it necessary. The very jealousy of his self-love marked his respect; and
if he thought the less of Dr. Johnson, he would have been more willing
to risk the encounter.' Hazlitt's <i>Conversations of Northcote</i>, p. 45.
It should seem that Johnson had a second interview with the King
thirteen years later. In 1780, Hannah More records (<i>Memoirs</i>, i.
174):—'Johnson told me he had been with the King that morning, who
enjoined him to add Spenser to his <i>Lives of the Poets</i>.' It is strange
that, so far as I know, this interview is not mentioned by any one else.
It is perhaps alluded to, <i>post</i>, Dec., 1784, when Mr. Nichols told
Johnson that he wished 'he would gratify his sovereign by a <i>Life of
Spenser</i>.'</p>

<p>[118] It is proper here to mention, that when I speak of his
correspondence, I consider it independent of the voluminous collection
of letters which, in the course of many years, he wrote to Mrs. Thrale,
which forms a separate part of his works; and as a proof of the high
estimation set on any thing which came from his pen, was sold by that
lady for the sum of five hundred pounds. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[119] He was away from the London 'near six months.' See <i>ante</i>, ii. 30.</p>

<p>[120] On August 17 he recorded:—'I have communicated with Kitty, and
kissed her. I was for some time distracted, but at last more composed. I
commended my friends, and Kitty, Lucy, and I were much affected. Kitty
is, I think, going to heaven.' <i>Pr. and Med., p. 75</i>.</p>

<p>[121] <i>Pr. and Med</i>., pp. 77 and 78. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[122] <i>Pr. and Med</i>., p. 73. BOSWELL. On Aug. 17, he recorded:—'By
abstinence from wine and suppers I obtained sudden and great relief, and
had freedom of mind restored to me, which I have wanted for all this
year, without being able to find any means of obtaining it.' <i>Ib</i> p. 74.</p>

<p>[123] Hawkins, in his second edition (p. 347) assigns it to Campbell,
'who,' he says, 'as well for the malignancy of his heart as his terrific
countenance, was called horrible Campbell.'</p>

<p>[124] See <i>ante</i>, i. 218.</p>

<p>[125] The book is as dull as it is indecent. The 'drollery' is of the
following kind. Johnson is represented as saying:—'Without dubiety you
misapprehend this dazzling scintillation of conceit in totality, and had
you had that constant recurrence to my oraculous dictionary which was
incumbent upon you from the vehemence of my monitory injunctions,'
&amp;c. p. 2.</p>

<p>[126] <i>Pr. and Med</i>., p. 81. BOSWELL. 'This day,' he wrote on his
birthday, 'has been passed in great perturbation; I was distracted at
church in an uncommon degree, and my distress has had very little
intermission…. This day it came into my mind to write the history of
my melancholy. On this I purpose to deliberate; I know not whether it
may not too much disturb me.' See <i>post</i>, April 8, 1780.</p>

<p>[127] It is strange that Boswell nowhere quotes the lines in <i>The
Good-Natured Man</i>, in which Paoli is mentioned. 'That's from Paoli of
Corsica,' said Lofty. Act v. sc. i.</p>

<p>[128] In the original, 'Pressed <i>by</i>.' Boswell, in thus changing the
preposition, forgot what Johnson says in his <i>Plan of an English
Dictionary</i> (<i>Works</i>, v. 12):—'We say, according to the present modes
of speech, The soldier died <i>of</i> his wounds, and the sailor perished
<i>with</i> hunger; and every man acquainted with our language would be
offended with a change of these particles, which yet seem originally
assigned by chance.'</p>

<p>[129] Boswell, writing to Temple on March 24, says:—'My book has
amazing celebrity; Lord Lyttelton, Mr. Walpole, Mrs. Macaulay, and Mr.
Garrick have all written me noble letters about it. There are two Dutch
translations going forward.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 145. It met with a
rapid sale. A third edition was called for within a year. Dilly, the
publisher, must have done very well by it, as he purchased the copyright
for one hundred guineas. <i>Ib</i>, p. 103. 'Pray read the new account of
Corsica,' wrote Horace Walpole to Gray on Feb. 18, 1768 (<i>Letters</i>, v.
85). 'The author is a strange being, and has a rage of knowing everybody
that ever was talked of. He forced himself upon me at Paris in spite of
my teeth and my doors.' To this Gray replied:—'Mr. Boswell's book has
pleased and moved me strangely; all, I mean, that relates to Paoli. He
is a man born two thousand years after his time! The pamphlet proves,
what I have always maintained, that any fool may write a most valuable
book by chance, if he will only tell us what he heard and saw with
veracity.' In <i>The Letters of Boswell</i> (p. 122) there is the following
under date of Nov. 9, 1767:—'I am always for fixing some period for my
perfection, as far as possible. Let it be when my account of <i>Corsica</i>
is published; I shall then have a character which I must support.' In
April 16 of the following year, a few weeks after the book had come out,
he writes:—'To confess to you at once, Temple, I have since my last
coming to town been as wild as ever.' (p. 146.)</p>

<p>[130] Boswell used to put notices of his movements in the newspapers,
such as—'James Boswell, Esq., is expected in town.' <i>Public
Advertiser</i>, Feb. 28, 1768. 'Yesterday James Boswell, Esq., arrived from
Scotland at his lodgings in Half-Moon Street, Piccadilly.' <i>Ib</i> March
24, 1768. Prior's <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 449.</p>

<p>[131] Johnson was very ill during this visit. Mrs. Thrale had at the
same time given birth to a daughter, and had been nursed by her mother.
His thoughts, therefore, were turned on illness. Writing to Mrs. Thrale,
he says:—'To roll the weak eye of helpless anguish, and see nothing on
any side but cold indifference, will, I hope, happen to none whom I love
or value; it may tend to withdraw the mind from life, but has no
tendency to kindle those affections which fit us for a purer and a
nobler state…. These reflections do not grow out of any discontent at
C's [Chambers's] behaviour; he has been neither negligent nor
troublesome; nor do I love him less for having been ill in his house.
This is no small degree of praise.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 13.</p>

<p>[132] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 3, note.</p>

<p>[133] The editor of the <i>Letters of Boswell</i> justly says (p. 149):—'The
detail in the <i>Life of Johnson</i> is rather scanty about this period;
dissipation, the <i>History of Corsica</i>, wife-hunting, … interfered
perhaps at this time with Boswell's pursuit of Dr. Johnson.'</p>

<p>[134] See <i>Boswell's</i> Hebrides, Aug. 15, 1773, for a discussion of the
same question. Lord Eldon has recorded (<i>Life</i>, i. 106), that when he
first went the Northern Circuit (about 1776-1780), he asked Jack Lee
(<i>post</i>, March 20, 1778), who was not scrupulous in his advocacy,
whether his method could be justified. 'Oh, yes,' he said, 'undoubtedly.
Dr. Johnson had said that counsel were at liberty to state, as the
parties themselves would state, what it was most for their interest to
state.' After some interval, and when he had had his evening bowl of
milk punch and two or three pipes of tobacco, he suddenly said, 'Come,
Master Scott, let us go to bed. I have been thinking upon the questions
that you asked me, and I am not quite so sure that the conduct you
represented will bring a man peace at the last.' Lord Eldon, after
stating pretty nearly what Johnson had said, continues:—'But it may be
questioned whether even this can be supported.'</p>

<p>[135] Garrick brought out Hugh Kelly's <i>False Delicacy</i> at Drury Lane
six days before Goldsmith's <i>Good-Natured Man</i> was brought out at Covent
Garden. 'It was the town talk,' says Mr. Forster (<i>Life of Goldsmith</i>,
ii. 93), some weeks before either performance took place, 'that the two
comedies were to be pitted against each other.' <i>False Delicacy</i> had a
great success. Ten thousand copies of it were sold before the season
closed. (<i>Ib</i> p. 96.) 'Garrick's prologue to <i>False Delicacy</i>,' writes
Murphy (<i>Life of Garrick</i>, p. 287), 'promised a moral and sentimental
comedy, and with an air of pleasantry called it a sermon in five acts.
The critics considered it in the same light, but the general voice was
in favour of the play during a run of near twenty nights. Foote, at
last, by a little piece called <i>Piety in Pattens</i>, brought that species
of composition into disrepute.' It is recorded in Johnson's <i>Works</i>
(1787), xi. 201, that when some one asked Johnson whether they should
introduce Hugh Kelly to him, 'No, Sir,' says he, 'I never desire to
converse with a man who has written more than he has read.' See <i>post</i>,
beginning of 1777.</p>

<p>[136] <i>The Provoked Husband, or A Journey to London</i>, by Vanbrugh and
Colley Cibber. It was brought out in 1727-8. See <i>post</i>, June 3, 1784.</p>

<p>[137] See <i>ante</i>, i. 213.</p>

<p>[138] April 6, 1772, and April 12, 1776.</p>

<p>[139] Richardson, writing on Dec. 7, 1756, to Miss Fielding, about her
Familiar Letters, says:—'What a knowledge of the human heart! Well
might a critical judge of writing say, as he did to me, that your late
brother's knowledge of it was not (fine writer as he was) comparable to
yours. His was but as the knowledge of the outside of a clock-work
machine, while yours was that of all the finer springs and movements of
the inside.' <i>Richardson Corres</i>. ii. 104. Mrs. Calderwood, writing of
her visit to the Low Countries in 1756, says:—'All Richison's
[Richardson's] books are translated, and much admired abroad; but for
Fielding's the foreigners have no notion of them, and do not understand
them, as the manners are so entirely English.' <i>Letters, &amp;c., of Mrs.
Calderwood</i>, p. 208</p>

<p>[140] In <i>The Provoked Husband</i>, act iv. sc. 1.</p>

<p>[141] By Dr. Hoadley, brought out in 1747. 'This was the first good
comedy from the time of <i>The Provoked Husband</i> in 1727.' Murphy's
<i>Garrick</i>, p. 78.</p>

<p>[142] Madame Riccoboni, writing to Garrick from Paris on Sept. 7, 1768,
says:—'On ne supporterait point ici l'indécence de Ranger. Les
trèsindécens Françaisdeviennent délicats sur leur théâtre, à mesure
qu'ils le sont moins dans leur conduite.' <i>Garrick's Corres</i>. ii. 548.</p>

<p>[143] 'The question in dispute was as to the heirship of Mr. Archibald
Douglas. If he were really the son of Lady Jane Douglas, he would
inherit large family estates; but if he were supposititious, then they
would descend to the Duke of Hamilton. The Judges of the Court of
Session had been divided in opinion, eight against seven, the Lord
President Dundas giving the casting vote in favour of the Duke of
Hamilton; and in consequence of it he and several other of the judges
had, on the reversal by the Lords, their houses attacked by a mob. It is
said, but not upon conclusive authority, that Boswell himself headed the
mob which broke his own father's windows.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 86.
See <i>post</i>, April 27, 1773, and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 24-26, 1773.
Mr. J. H. Burton, in his <i>Life of Hume</i> (ii. 150), says:—'Men about to
meet each other in company used to lay an injunction on themselves not
to open their lips on the subject, so fruitful was it in debates and
brawls.' Boswell, according to the Bodleian catalogue, was the author of
<i>Dorando, A Spanish Tale</i>, 1767. In this tale the Douglas cause is
narrated under the thinnest disguise. It is reviewed in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>.
for 1767, p. 361.</p>

<p>[144] See <i>post</i>, under April 19, 1772, March 15, 1779, and June 2,
1781.</p>

<p>[145] Revd. Kenneth Macaulay. See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 27, 1773.
He was the great-uncle of Lord Macaulay.</p>

<p>[146] Martin, in his <i>St. Kilda</i> (p. 38), had stated that the people of
St. Kilda 'are seldom troubled with a cough, except at the Steward's
landing. I told them plainly,' he continues, 'that I thought all this
notion of infection was but a mere fancy, at which they seemed offended,
saying, that never any before the minister and myself was heard to doubt
of the truth of it, which is plainly demonstrated upon the landing of
every boat.' The usual 'infected cough,' came, he says, upon his visit.
Macaulay (<i>History of St. Kilda</i>, p. 204) says that he had gone to the
island a disbeliever, but that by eight days after his arrival all the
inhabitants were infected with this disease. See also <i>post</i>, March, 21,
1772, and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 2, 1773.</p>

<p>[147] See <i>ante</i>, July 1, 1763.</p>

<p>[148] <i>Post</i>, March 21, 1772.</p>

<p>[149] This is not the case. Martin (p. 9) says that the only landing
place is inaccessible except under favour of a neap tide, a north-east
or west wind, or with a perfect calm. He himself was rowed to St. Kilda,
'the inhabitants admiring to see us get thither contrary to the wind and
tide' (p. 5).</p>

<p>[150] That for one kind of learning Oxford has no advantages, he shows
in a letter that he wrote there on Aug. 4, 1777. 'I shall inquire,' he
says, 'about the harvest when I come into a region where anything
necessary to life is understood.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 349. At Lichfield
he reached that region. 'My barber, a man not unintelligent, speaks
magnificently of the harvest;' <i>Ib</i> p. 351.</p>

<p>[151] See <i>post</i>, Sept. 14, 1777.</p>

<p>[152] See <i>ante</i>, i. 116.</p>

<p>[153] The advancement had been very rapid. 'When Dr. Robertson's career
commenced,' writes Dugald Stewart in his <i>Life</i> of that historian (p.
157), 'the trade of authorship was unknown in Scotland.' Smollet, in
<i>Humphry Clinker</i>, published three years after this conversation, makes
Mr. Bramble write (Letter of Aug. 8):—'Edinburgh is a hot-bed of
genius. I have had the good fortune to be made acquainted with many
authors of the first distinction; such as the two Humes [David Hume and
John Home, whose names had the same pronunciation], Robertson, Smith,
Wallace, Blair, Ferguson, Wilkie, &amp;c.' To these might be added Smollett
himself, Boswell, Reid, Beattie, Kames, Monboddo. Henry Mackenzie and
Dr. Henry began to publish in 1771. Gibbon, writing to Robertson in
1779, says:—'I have often considered with some sort of envy the
valuable society which you possess in so narrow a compass.' Stewart's
<i>Robertson</i>, p. 363.</p>

<p>[154] See <i>post</i>, April 30, 1773, where Johnson owned that he had not
read Hume. J.H. Burton (<i>Life of Hume</i>, ii. 129), after stating that
'Hume was the first to add to a mere narrative of events an enquiry into
the progress of the people, &amp;c.,' says:—'There seems to be no room for
the supposition that he had borrowed the idea from Voltaire's <i>Essai sur
les Moeurs</i>. Hume's own <i>Political Discourses</i> are as close an approach
to this method of inquiry as the work of Voltaire; and if we look for
such productions of other writers as may have led him into this train of
thought, it would be more just to name Bacon and Montesquieu.'</p>

<p>[155] See <i>post</i>, May 8 and 13, 1778.</p>

<p>[156] See <i>post</i>, April 30, 1773, April 29, 1778, and Oct. 10, 1779.</p>

<p>[157] <i>An Essay on the Future Life of Brutes</i>. By Richard Dean, Curate
of Middleton, Manchester, 1767. The 'part of the Scriptures' on which
the author chiefly relies is the <i>Epistle to the Romans</i>, viii. 19-23.
He also finds support for his belief in 'those passages in <i>Isaiah</i>
where the prophet speaks of new Heavens, and a new Earth, of the Lion as
eating straw like the Ox, &amp;c.' Vol. ii. pp. x, 4.</p>

<p>[158] The words that Addison's Cato uses as he lays his hand on his
sword. Act v. sc. 1.</p>

<p>[159] I should think it impossible not to wonder at the variety of
Johnson's reading, however desultory it may have been. Who could have
imagined that the High Church of England-man would be so prompt in
quoting <i>Maupertuis</i>, who, I am sorry to think, stands in the list of
those unfortunate mistaken men, who call themselves <i>esprits forts</i>. I
have, however, a high respect for that Philosopher whom the Great
Frederick of Prussia loved and honoured, and addressed pathetically in
one of his Poems,—</p>

<p>'Maupertuis, cher Maupertuis,<br/>

 Que notre vie est peu de chose!'<br/>
</p>

<p>There was in Maupertuis a vigour and yet a tenderness of sentiment,
united with strong intellectual powers, and uncommon ardour of soul.
Would he had been a Christian! I cannot help earnestly venturing to hope
that he is one now. BOSWELL. Voltaire writing to D'Alembert on Aug. 25,
1759, says:—'Que dites-vous de Maupertuis, mort entre deux capucins?'
Voltaire's <i>Works</i>, lxii. 94. The stanza from which Boswell quotes is as
follows:—</p>

<p>'O Maupertuis, cher Maupertuis,<br/>

Que notre vie est peu de chose!<br/>

Cette fleur, qui brille aujourd'hui<br/>

Demain se fane à peine éclose;<br/>

Tout périt, tout est emporté<br/>

Par la dure fatalité<br/>

Des arrtês de la destinée;<br/>

Votre vertu, vos grands talents<br/>

Ne pourront obtenir du temps<br/>

Le seul délai d'une journée.'<br/>

  _La vie est un Songe. Euvres de<br/>

        Frédéric II (edit. 1849), x. 40.<br/>
</p>

<p>[160] Johnson does not give <i>Conglobulate</i> in his <i>Dictionary</i>; only
<i>conglobe</i>. If he used the word it is not likely that he said
'conglobulate <i>together</i>.'</p>

<p>[161] Gilbert White, writing on Nov. 4, 1767, after mentioning that he
had seen swallows roosting in osier-beds by the river, says:—'This
seems to give some countenance to the northern opinion (strange as it
is) of their retiring under water.' White's <i>Selborne</i>, Letter xii. See
also <i>post</i>, May 7, 1773.</p>

<p>[162] <i>Travels from St. Petersburgh in Russia to divers parts of Asia</i>.
By John Bell, Glasgow, 1763: 4to. 2 vols.</p>

<p>[163] I. D'Israeli (<i>Curiosities of Literature</i>, ed. 1834, i. 194) ranks
this book among Literary Impostures. 'Du Halde never travelled ten
leagues from Paris in his life; though he appears by his writings to be
familiar with Chinese scenery.' See <i>ante</i>, i. 136.</p>

<p>[164] See <i>post</i>, Oct. 10, 1779.</p>

<p>[165] Boswell, in his correspondence with Temple in 1767 and 1768,
passes in review the various ladies whom he proposes to marry. The lady
described in this paragraph—for the 'gentleman' is clearly Boswell—is
'the fair and lively Zelide,' a Dutch-woman. She was translating his
<i>Corsica</i> into French. On March 24, 1768, he wrote, 'I must have her.'
On April 26, he asked his father's permission to go over to Holland to
see her. But on May 14 he forwarded to Temple one of her letters.
'Could,' he said, 'any actress at any of the theatres attack me with a
keener—what is the word? not fury, something softer. The lightning that
flashes with so much brilliance may scorch, and does not her esprit do
so?' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, pp. 144-150.</p>

<p>[166] In the original it is <i>some</i> not <i>many</i>. Johnson's <i>Works</i>, vii.
182.</p>

<p>[167] <i>An account of the Manners and Customs of Italy</i>, by Joseph
Baretti, London, 1768. The book would be still more entertaining were it
not written as a reply to Sharp's <i>Letters on Italy</i>. <i>Post</i> under
April 29, 1776.</p>

<p>[168] Mrs. Piozzi wrote of him: 'His character is easily seen, and his
soul above disguise, haughty and insolent, and breathing defiance
against all mankind; while his powers of mind exceed most people's, and
his powers of purse are so slight that they leave him dependent on all.
Baretti is for ever in the state of a stream damned up; if he could once
get loose, he would bear down all before him.' Hayward's <i>Piozzi</i>,
ii. 335.</p>

<p>[169] According to Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 460), the watch was new this
year, and was, he believed, the first Johnson ever had.</p>

<p>[170] <i>St. John</i>, ix. 4. In <i>Pr. and Med</i>., p. 233, is the
following:—'Ejaculation imploring diligence. "O God, make me to
remember that the night cometh when no man can work."' Porson, in his
witty attack on Sir John Hawkins, originally published in the <i>Gent.
Mag</i>. for 1787, quotes the inscription as a proof of Hawkins's Greek.
'<i>Nux gar erchetai</i>. The meaning is (says Sir John) <i>For the night
cometh</i>. And so it is, Mr. Urban.' Porson <i>Tracts</i>, p. 337.</p>

<p>[171] He thus wrote of himself from Oxford to Mrs. Thrale:—'This little
dog does nothing, but I hope he will mend; he is now reading <i>Jack the
Giant-killer</i>. Perhaps so noble a narrative may rouse in him the soul of
enterprise.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 9.</p>

<p>[172] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 3</p>

<p>[173] Under the same date, Boswell thus begins a letter to
Temple:—'Your moral lecture came to me yesterday in very good time,
while I lay suffering severely for immorality. If there is any firmness
at all in me, be assured that I shall never again behave in a manner so
unworthy the friend of Paoli. My warm imagination looks forward with
great complacency on the sobriety, the healthfulness, and the worth of
my future life.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 147</p>

<p>[174] Johnson so early as Aug. 21, 1766, had given him the same advice
(<i>ante</i>, ii. 22). How little Boswell followed it is shewn by his letter
to the Earl of Chatham, on April 8, 1767, in which he informed him of
his intention to publish his <i>Corsica</i>, and concluded:—'Could your
Lordship find time to honour me now and then with a letter? I have been
told how favourably your Lordship has spoken of me. To correspond with a
Paoli and with a Chatham is enough to keep a young man ever ardent in
the pursuit of virtuous fame.' <i>Chatham Corres</i>., iii. 246. On the same
day on which he wrote to Johnson, he said in a letter to Temple, 'Old
General Oglethorpe, who has come to see me, and is with me often, just
on account of my book, bids me not marry till I have first put the
Corsicans in a proper situation. "You may make a fortune in the doing of
it," said he; "or, if you do not, you will have acquired such a
character as will entitle you to any fortune."' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p.
148. Four months later, Boswell wrote:—'By a private subscription in
Scotland, I am sending this week £700 worth of ordnance [to Corsica] …
It is really a tolerable train of artillery.' <i>Ib</i> p. 156. In 1769 he
brought out a small volume entitled <i>British Essays in favour of the
Brave Corsicans. By Several Hands</i>. Collected and published by James
Boswell, Esq.</p>

<p>[175] From about the beginning of the fourteenth century, Corsica had
belonged to the Republic of Genoa. In the great rising under Paoli, the
Corsicans would have achieved their independence, had not Genoa ceded
the island to the crown of France.</p>

<p>[176] Boswell, writing to Temple on May 14 of this year, says:—'I am
really the <i>great man</i> now. I have had David Hume in the forenoon, and
Mr. Johnson in the afternoon of the same day, visiting me. Sir J.
Pringle and Dr. Franklin dined with me to-day; and Mr. Johnson and
General Oglethorpe one day, Mr. Garrick alone another, and David Hume
and some more <i>literati</i> another, dine with me next week. I give
admirable dinners and good claret; and the moment I go abroad again,
which will be in a day or two, I set up my chariot. This is enjoying the
fruit of my labours, and appearing like the friend of Paoli.' <i>Letters
of Boswell</i>, p. 151.</p>

<p>[177] See <i>post</i>, April 12, 1778, and May 8, 1781.</p>

<p>[178] The talk arose no doubt from the general election that had just
been held amid all the excitement about Wilkes. Dr. Franklin (<i>Memoirs</i>,
iii. 307), in a letter dated April 16, 1768, describes the riots in
London. He had seen 'the mob requiring gentlemen and ladies of all ranks
as they passed in their carriages, to shout for Wilkes and liberty,
marking the same words on all their coaches with chalk, and No. 45 on
every door. I went last week to Winchester, and observed that for
fifteen miles out of town there was scarce a door or window shutter next
the road unmarked; and this continued here and there quite to
Winchester.'</p>

<p>[179] In his <i>Vindication of the Licensers of the Stage</i>, he thus
writes:—'If I might presume to advise them [the Ministers] upon this
great affair, I should dissuade them from any direct attempt upon the
liberty of the press, which is the darling of the common people, and
therefore cannot be attacked without immediate danger.' <i>Works</i>, v. 344.
On p. 191 of the same volume, he shows some of the benefits that arise
in England from 'the boundless liberty with which every man may write
his own thoughts.' See also in his <i>Life of Milton</i>, the passage about
<i>Areopagitica</i>, <i>Ib</i> vii. 82. The liberty of the press was likely to be
'a constant topic.' Horace Walpole (<i>Memoirs of the Reign of George
III</i>, ii. 15), writing of the summer of 1764, says:—'Two hundred
informations were filed against printers; a larger number than had been
prosecuted in the whole thirty-three years of the last reign.'</p>

<p>[180] 'The sun has risen, and the corn has grown, and, whatever talk has
been of the danger of property, yet he that ploughed the field commonly
reaped it, and he that built a house was master of the door; the
vexation excited by injustice suffered, or supposed to be suffered, by
any private man, or single community, was local and temporary; it
neither spread far nor lasted long.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, vi. 170. See
also <i>post</i>, March 31, 1772. Dr. Franklin (<i>Memoirs</i>, iii. 215) wrote to
the Abbé Morellet, on April 22, 1787:—'Nothing can be better expressed
than your sentiments are on this point, where you prefer liberty of
trading, cultivating, manufacturing, &amp;c., even to civil liberty, this
being affected but rarely, the other every hour.'</p>

<p>[181] See <i>ante</i>, July 6, 1763.</p>

<p>[182] See <i>ante</i>, Oct. 1765.</p>

<p>[183] 'I was diverted with Paoli's English library. It consisted
of:—Some broken volumes of the <i>Spectatour</i> and <i>Tatler</i>; Pope's <i>Essay
on Man</i>; <i>Gulliver's Travels</i>; A <i>History of France</i> in old English; and
Barclay's <i>Apology for the Quakers</i>. I promised to send him some English
books… I have sent him some of our best books of morality and
entertainment, in particular the works of Mr. Samuel Johnson.' Boswell's
<i>Corsica</i>, p. 169.</p>

<p>[184] Johnson, as Boswell believed, only once 'in the whole course of
his life condescended to oppose anything that was written against him.'
(See <i>ante</i>, i. 314.) In this he followed the rule of Bentley and of
Boerhaave. 'It was said to old Bentley, upon the attacks against him,
"why, they'll write you down." "No, Sir," he replied; "depend upon it,
no man was ever written down but by himself."' Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>,
Oct. 1 1773. Bentley shewed prudence in his silence. 'He was right,'
Johnson said, 'not to answer; for, in his hazardous method of writing,
he could not but be often enough wrong.' Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 10,
1773. 'Boerhaave was never soured by calumny and detraction, nor ever
thought it necessary to confute them; "for they are sparks," said he,
"which, if you do not blow them, will go out of themselves."' Johnson's
<i>Works</i>, vi. 288. Swift, in his <i>Lines on Censure</i> which begin,—</p>

<p>  'Ye wise instruct me to endure<br/>

   An evil which admits no cure.'<br/>
</p>

<p>ends by saying:—</p>

<p>  'The most effectual way to baulk<br/>

   Their malice is—to let them talk.'<br/>

              Swift's <i>Works</i>, xi. 58.<br/>
</p>

<p>Young, in his <i>Second Epistle to Pope</i>, had written:—</p>

<p>  'Armed with this truth all critics I defy;<br/>

   For if I fall, by my own pen I die.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Hume, in his <i>Auto</i>. (p. ix.) says:—'I had a fixed resolution, which I
inflexibly maintained, never to reply to any body.' This is not quite
true. See J. H. Burton's <i>Life of Hume</i>, ii. 252, for an instance of a
violent reply. The following passages in Johnson's writings are to the
same effect:—'I am inclined to believe that few attacks either of
ridicule or invective make much noise, but by the help of those that
they provoke.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i> ii. 289. 'It is very rarely that an
author is hurt by his critics. The blaze of reputation cannot be blown
out, but it often dies in the socket.' <i>Ib</i> p. 110. 'The writer who
thinks his works formed for duration mistakes his interest when he
mentions his enemies. He degrades his own dignity by shewing that he was
affected by their censures, and gives lasting importance to names,
which, left to themselves would vanish from remembrance.' Johnson's
<i>Works</i>, vii. 294. 'If it had been possible for those who were attacked
to conceal their pain and their resentment, the <i>Dunciad</i> might have
made its way very slowly in the world.' <i>Ib</i> viii. 276. Hawkins (<i>Life
of Johnson</i>, p. 348) says that, 'against personal abuse Johnson was ever
armed by a reflection that I have heard him utter:—"Alas! reputation
would be of little worth, were it in the power of every concealed enemy
to deprive us of it."' In his <i>Parl. Debates</i> (<i>Works</i>, x. 359), Johnson
makes Mr. Lyttelton say:—'No man can fall into contempt but those who
deserve it.' Addison in <i>The Freeholder</i>, No. 40, says, that 'there is
not a more melancholy object in the learned world than a man who has
written himself down.' See also Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, near the end.</p>

<p>[185] Barber had entered Johnson's service in 1752 (<i>ante</i>, i. 239).
Nine years before this letter was written he had been a sailor on board
a frigate (<i>ante</i>, i. 348), so that he was somewhat old for a boy.</p>

<p>[186] Boswell, writing to Temple on May 14 of this year; says:—'Dr.
Robertson is come up laden with his <i>Charles V</i>.—three large quartos;
he has been offered three thousand guineas for it.' <i>Letters of
Boswell</i>, p. 152.</p>

<p>[187] In like manner the professors at Aberdeen and Glasgow seemed
afraid to speak in his presence. See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug 23 and
Oct 29, 1773. See also <i>post</i>, April 20, 1778.</p>

<p>[188] See <i>ante</i>, July 28, 1763.</p>

<p>[189] Johnson, in inserting this letter, says (Works, viii. 374):—'I
communicate it with much pleasure, as it gives me at once an opportunity
of recording the fraternal kindness of Thomson, and reflecting on the
friendly assistance of Mr. Boswell, from whom I received it.' See
<i>post</i>, July 9, 1777, and June 18, 1778.</p>

<p>[190] Murphy, in his <i>Life of Garrick</i>, p. 183, says that Garrick once
brought Dr. Munsey—so he writes the name—to call on him. 'Garrick
entered the dining-room, and turning suddenly round, ran to the door,
and called out, "Dr. Munsey, where are you going?" "Up stairs to see the
author," said Munsey. "Pho! pho! come down, the author is here." Dr.
Munsey came, and, as he entered the room, said in his free way, "You
scoundrel! I was going up to the garret. Who could think of finding an
author on the first floor?"' Mrs. Montagu wrote to Lord Lyttelton from
Tunbridge in 1760:—'The great Monsey (<i>sic</i>) came hither on Friday …
He is great in the coffee-house, great in the rooms, and great on the
pantiles.' <i>Montagu Letters</i>, iv. 291. In Rogers's <i>Table-Talk</i>, p. 271,
there is a curious account of him.</p>

<p>[191] See <i>ante</i>, July 26, 1763.</p>

<p>[192] My respectable friend, upon reading this passage, observed, that
he probably must have said not simply, 'strong facts,' but 'strong facts
well arranged.' His lordship, however, knows too well the value of
written documents to insist on setting his recollection against my notes
taken at the time. He does not attempt to <i>traverse</i> the record. The
fact, perhaps, may have been, either that the additional words escaped
me in the noise of a numerous company, or that Dr. Johnson, from his
impetuosity, and eagerness to seize an opportunity to make a lively
retort, did not allow Dr. Douglas to finish his sentence. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[193] 'It is boasted that between November [1712] and January, eleven
thousand [of <i>The Conduct of the Allies</i>] were sold…. Yet surely
whoever surveys this wonder-working pamphlet with cool perusal, will
confess that it's efficacy was supplied by the passions of its readers;
that it operates by the mere weight of facts, with very little
assistance from the hand that produced them.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>,
viii. 203.</p>

<p>[194] 'Every great man, of whatever kind be his greatness, has among his
friends those who officiously or insidiously quicken his attention to
offences, heighten his disgust, and stimulate his resentment.' <i>Ib</i>
viii 266.</p>

<p>[195] See the hard drawing of him in Churchill's <i>Rosciad</i>. BOSWELL. See
<i>ante</i>, i. 391, note 2.</p>

<p>[196] For <i>talk</i>, see <i>post</i>, under March 30 1783.</p>

<p>[197] See <i>post</i>, Oct. 6, 1769, and May 8, 1778, where Johnson tosses
Boswell.</p>

<p>[198] See <i>post</i>, Sept. 22, 1777, and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Nov. i,
1773.</p>

<p>[199] See <i>post</i>, Nov. 27, 1773, note, April 7, 1775, and under May 8,
1781.</p>

<p>[200] He wrote the character of Mr. Mudge. See <i>post</i>, under March 20,
1781.</p>

<p>[201] 'Sept. 18, 1769. This day completes the sixtieth year of my
age…. The last year has been wholly spent in a slow progress of
recovery.' <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 85.</p>

<p>[202] In which place he has been succeeded by Bennet Langton, Esq. When
that truly religious gentleman was elected to this honorary
Professorship, at the same time that Edward Gibbon, Esq., noted for
introducing a kind of sneering infidelity into his Historical Writings,
was elected Professor in Ancient History, in the room of Dr. Goldsmith,
I observed that it brought to my mind, 'Wicked Will Whiston and good Mr.
Ditton.' I am now also of that admirable institution as Secretary for
Foreign Correspondence, by the favour of the Academicians, and the
approbation of the Sovereign. BOSWELL. Goldsmith, writing to his brother
in Jan., 1770, said:—'The King has lately been pleased to make me
Professor of Ancient History in a Royal Academy of Painting, which he
has just established, but there is no salary annexed, and I took it
rather as a compliment to the institution than any benefit to myself.
Honours to one in my situation are something like ruffles to one that
wants a shirt.' Prior's <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 221. 'Wicked Will Whiston,'
&amp;c., comes from Swift's <i>Ode for Music, On the Longitude</i> (Swift's
<i>Works</i>, ed. 1803, xxiv. 39), which begins,—</p>

<p>'The longitude miss'd on<br/>

By wicked Will Whiston;<br/>

And not better hit on<br/>

By good Master Ditton.'<br/>
</p>

<p>It goes on so grossly and so offensively as regards one and the other,
that Boswell's comparison was a great insult to Langton as well as
to Gibbon.</p>

<p>[203] It has this inscription in a blank leaf:—'<i>Hunc librum D.D.
Samuel Johnson, eo quod hic loci studiis interdum vacaret</i>.' Of this
library, which is an old Gothick room, he was very fond. On my observing
to him that some of the <i>modern</i> libraries of the University were more
commodious and pleasant for study, as being more spacious and airy, he
replied, 'Sir, if a man has a mind to <i>prance</i>, he must study at
Christ-Church and All-Souls.' BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[204] During this visit he seldom or never dined out. He appeared to be
deeply engaged in some literary work. Miss Williams was now with him at
Oxford. BOSWELL. It was more likely the state of his health which kept
him at home. Writing from Oxford on June 27 of this year to Mrs. Thrale,
who had been ill, he says:—'I will not increase your uneasiness with
mine. I hope I grow better. I am very cautious and very timorous.'
<i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 21.</p>

<p>[205] Boswell wrote a letter, signed with his own name, to the <i>London
Magazine</i> for 1769 (p. 451) describing the Jubilee. It is followed by a
print of himself 'in the dress of an armed Corsican chief,' and by an
account, no doubt written by himself. It says:—'Of the most remarkable
masks upon this occasion was James Boswell, Esq., in the dress of an
armed Corsican chief. He entered the amphitheatre about twelve o'clock.
On the front of his cap was embroidered in gold letters, <i>Viva La
Liberta</i>; and on one side of it was a handsome blue feather and cockade,
so that it had an elegant, as well as a warlike appearance. He wore no
mask, saying that it was not proper for a gallant Corsican. So soon as
he came into the room he drew universal attention.' Cradock (<i>Memoirs</i>,
i. 217) gives a melancholy account of the festival. The preparations
were all behind-hand and the weather was stormy. 'There was a masquerade
in the evening, and all zealous friends endeavoured to keep up the
spirit of it as long as they could, till they were at last informed that
the Avon was rising so very fast that no delay could be admitted. The
ladies of our party were conveyed by planks from the building to the
coach, and found that the wheels had been two feet deep in water.'
Garrick in 1771 was asked by the Stratford committee to join them in
celebrating a Jubilee every year, as 'the most likely method to promote
the interest and reputation of their town.' Boswell caught at the
proposal eagerly, and writing to Garrick said:—'I please myself with
the prospect of attending you at several more Jubilees at
Stratford-upon-Avon.' <i>Garrick Corres</i>. i. 414, 435.</p>

<p>[206] Garrick's correspondents not seldom spoke disrespectfully of
Johnson. Thus, Mr. Sharp, writing to him in 1769, talks of 'risking the
sneer of one of Dr. Johnson's ghastly smiles.' <i>Ib</i> i. 334. Dr. J.
Hoadly, in a letter dated July 25, 1775, says:—'Mr. Good-enough has
written a kind of parody of Puffy Pensioner's <i>Taxation no Tyranny</i>,
under the noble title of <i>Resistance no Rebellion</i>.' <i>Ib</i> ii. 68.</p>

<p>[207] See ante, i. 181.</p>

<p>[208] In the Preface to my <i>Account of Corsica</i>, published in 1768, I
thus express myself:</p>

<p>'He who publishes a book affecting not to be an authour, and professing
an indifference for literary fame, may possibly impose upon many people
such an idea of his consequence as he wishes may be received. For my
part, I should be proud to be known as an authour, and I have an ardent
ambition for literary fame; for, of all possessions, I should imagine
literary fame to be the most valuable. A man who has been able to
furnish a book, which has been approved by the world, has established
himself as a respectable character in distant society, without any
danger of having that character lessened by the observation of his
weaknesses. To preserve an uniform dignity among those who see us every
day, is hardly possible; and to aim at it, must put us under the fetters
of perpetual restraint. The authour of an approved book may allow his
natural disposition an easy play, and yet indulge the pride of superior
genius, when he considers that by those who know him only as an authour,
he never ceases to be respected. Such an authour, when in his hours of
gloom and discontent, may have the consolation to think, that his
writings are, at that very time, giving pleasure to numbers; and such an
authour may cherish the hope of being remembered after death, which has
been a great object to the noblest minds in all ages.' BOSWELL. His
preface to the third edition thus ends:—'When I first ventured to send
this book into the world, I fairly owned an ardent desire for literary
fame. I have obtained my desire: and whatever clouds may overcast my
days, I can now walk here among the rocks and woods of my ancestors,
with an agreeable consciousness that I have done something worthy.' The
dedication of the first edition and the preface of the third are both
dated Oct. 29—one 1767, and the other 1768. Oct. 29 was his birthday.</p>

<p>[209] Paoli's father had been one of the leaders of the Corsicans in
their revolt against Genoa in 1734. Paoli himself was chosen by them as
their General-in-chief in 1755. In 1769 the island was conquered by the
French. He escaped in an English ship, and settled in England. Here he
stayed till 1789, when Mirabeau moved in the National Assembly the
recall of all the Corsican patriots. Paoli was thereupon appointed by
Louis XVI. Lieutenant-general and military commandant in Corsica. He
resisted the violence of the Convention, and was, in consequence,
summoned before it. Refusing to obey, an expedition was sent to arrest
him. Napoleon Buonaparte fought in the French army, but Paoli's party
proved the stronger. The islanders sought the aid of Great Britain, and
offered the crown of Corsica to George III. The offer was accepted, but
by an act of incredible folly, not Paoli, but Sir Gilbert Eliot, was
made Viceroy. Paoli returned to England, where he died in 1807, at the
age of eighty-two. In 1796 Corsica was abandoned by the English. By the
Revolution it ceased to be a conquered province, having been formally
declared an integral part of France. At the present day the Corsicans
are proud of being citizens of that great country; no less proud,
however, are they of Pascal Paoli, and of the gallant struggle for
independence of their forefathers.</p>

<p>[210] According to the <i>Ann. Reg</i>. (xii. 132) Paoli arrived in London on
Sept. 21. He certainly was in London on Oct. 10, for on that day he was
presented by Boswell to Johnson. Yet Wesley records in his <i>Journal</i>
(iii. 370) on Oct. 13:—'I very narrowly missed meeting the great Pascal
Paoli. He landed in the dock [at Portsmouth] but a very few minutes
after I left the waterside. Surely He who hath been with him from his
youth up hath not sent him into England for nothing.' In the <i>Public
Advertiser</i> for Oct. 4 there is the following entry, inserted no doubt
by Boswell:—'On Sunday last General Paoli, accompanied by James
Boswell, Esq., took an airing in Hyde Park in his coach.' Priors
<i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 450. Horace Walpole writes:—'Paoli's character had been
so advantageously exaggerated by Mr. Boswell's enthusiastic and
entertaining account of him, that the Opposition were ready to
incorporate him in the list of popular tribunes. The Court artfully
intercepted the project; and deeming patriots of all nations equally
corruptible, bestowed a pension of £1000 a year on the unheroic
fugitive.' <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George III</i>, iii. 387.</p>

<p>[211] Johnson, writes Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>., p. 228), ridiculed a friend
'who, looking out on Streatham Common from our windows, lamented the
enormous wickedness of the times, because some bird-catchers were busy
there one fine Sunday morning. "While half the Christian world is
permitted," said Johnson, "to dance and sing and celebrate Sunday as a
day of festivity, how comes your puritanical spirit so offended with
frivolous and empty deviations from exactness? Whoever loads life with
unnecessary scruples, Sir," continued he, "provokes the attention of
others on his conduct, and incurs the censure of singularity, without
reaping the reward of superior virtue."' See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>,
Aug. 20, 1773.</p>

<p>[212] The first edition of Hume's <i>History of England</i> was full of
Scotticisms, many of which he corrected in subsequent editions. MALONE.
According to Mr. J. H. Burton (<i>Life of Hume</i>, ii. 79), 'He appears to
have earnestly solicited the aid of Lyttelton, Mallet, and others, whose
experience of English composition might enable them to detect
Scotticisms.' Mr. Burton gives instances of alterations made in the
second edition. He says also that 'in none of his historical or
philosophical writings does any expression used by him, unless in those
cases where a Scotticism has escaped his vigilance, betray either the
district or the county of his origin.' <i>Ib</i> i. 9. Hume was shown in
manuscript Reid's <i>Inquiry into the Human Mind</i>. Though it was an attack
on his own philosophy, yet in reading it 'he kept,' he says, 'a watchful
eye all along over the style,' so that he might point out any
Scotticisms. <i>Ib</i> ii. 154. Nevertheless, as Dugald Stewart says in his
<i>Life of Robertson</i> (p. 214), 'Hume fails frequently both in purity and
grammatical correctness.' Even in his later letters I have noticed
Scotticisms.</p>

<p>[213] In 1763 Wilkes, as author of <i>The North Briton</i>, No. 45, had been
arrested on 'a general warrant directed to four messengers to take up
any persons without naming or describing them with any certainty, and to
bring them, together with their papers.' Such a warrant as this Chief
Justice Pratt (Lord Camden) declared to be 'unconstitutional, illegal,
and absolutely void.' <i>Ann. Reg</i>. vi. 145.</p>

<p>[214] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 24, 1773.</p>

<p>[215] In the Spring of this year, at a meeting of the electors of
Southwark, 'instructions' had been presented to Mr. Thrale and his
brother-member, of which the twelfth was:—'That you promote a bill for
shortening the duration of Parliaments.' <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxxix. 162.</p>

<p>[216] This paradox Johnson had exposed twenty-nine years earlier, in his
<i>Life of Sir Francis Drake</i>, <i>Works</i>, vi. 366. In <i>Rasselas</i>, chap. xi.,
he considers also the same question. Imlac is 'inclined to conclude
that, if nothing counteracts the natural consequence of learning, we
grow more happy as our minds take a wider range.' He then enumerates the
advantages which civilisation confers on the Europeans. 'They are surely
happy,' said the prince, 'who have all these conveniences.' 'The
Europeans,' answered Imlac, 'are less unhappy than we, but they are not
happy. Human life is everywhere a state in which much is to be endured
and little to be enjoyed.' Writing to Mrs. Thrale from Skye, Johnson
said: 'The traveller wanders through a naked desert, gratified
sometimes, but rarely, with the sight of cows, and now and then finds a
heap of loose stones and turf in a cavity between rocks, where a being
born with all those powers which education expands, and all those
sensations which culture refines, is condemned to shelter itself from
the wind and rain. Philosophers there are who try to make themselves
believe that this life is happy, but they believe it only while they are
saying it, and never yet produced conviction in a single mind.' <i>Piozzi
Letters</i>, i. 150. See <i>post</i>, April 21 and May 7, 1773, April 26, 1776,
and June 15, 1784.</p>

<p>[217] James Burnet, a Scotch Lord of Session, by the title of Lord
Monboddo. 'He was a devout believer in the virtues of the heroic ages,
and the deterioration of civilised mankind; a great contemner of
luxuries, insomuch that he never used a wheel carriage.' WALTER SCOTT,
quoted in Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 227. There is some account of him in
Chambers's <i>Traditions of Edinburgh</i>, ii. 175. In his <i>Origin of
Language</i>, to which Boswell refers in his next note, after praising
Henry Stephen for his <i>Greek Dictionary</i>, he continues:—'But to compile
a dictionary of a barbarous language, such as all the modern are
compared with the learned, is a work which a man of real genius, rather
than undertake, would choose to die of hunger, the most cruel, it is
said, of all deaths. I should, however, have praised this labour of
Doctor Johnson's more, though of the meanest kind,' &amp;c. Monboddo's
<i>Origin of Language</i>, v. 274. On p. 271, he says:—'Dr. Johnson was the
most invidious and malignant man I have ever known.' See <i>post</i>, March
21, 1772, May 8, 1773, and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 21, 1773.</p>

<p>[218] His Lordship having frequently spoken in an abusive manner of Dr.
Johnson, in my company, I on one occasion during the life-time of my
illustrious friend could not refrain from retaliation, and repeated to
him this saying. He has since published I don't know how many pages in
one of his curious books, attempting, in much anger, but with pitiful
effect, to persuade mankind that my illustrious friend was not the great
and good man which they esteemed and ever will esteem him to
be. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[219] Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 108) says:—'Mr. Johnson was indeed
unjustly supposed to be a lover of singularity. Few people had a more
settled reverence for the world than he, or was less captivated by new
modes of behaviour introduced, or innovations on the long-received
customs of common life.' In writing to Dr. Taylor to urge him to take a
certain course, he says:—'This I would have you do, not in compliance
with solicitation or advice, but as a justification of yourself to the
world; <i>the world has always a right to be regarded</i>.' <i>Notes and
Queries</i>, 6th S. v. 343. In <i>The Adventurer</i>, No. 131, he has a paper on
'Singularities.' After quoting Fontenelle's observation on Newton that
'he was not distinguished from other men by any singularity, either
natural or affected,' he goes on:—'Some may be found who, supported by
the consciousness of great abilities, and elevated by a long course of
reputation and applause, voluntarily consign themselves to singularity,
affect to cross the roads of life because they know that they shall not
be jostled, and indulge a boundless gratification of will, because they
perceive that they shall be quietly obeyed…. Singularity is, I think,
in its own nature universally and invariably displeasing.' Writing of
Swift, he says (<i>Works</i>, viii. 223):—'Whatever he did, he seemed
willing to do in a manner peculiar to himself, without sufficiently
considering that singularity, as it implies a contempt of the general
practice, is a kind of defiance which justly provokes the hostility of
ridicule; he, therefore, who indulges peculiar habits is worse than
others, if he be not better.' See <i>ante</i>, Oct. 1765, the record in his
<i>Journal</i>:—'At church. To avoid all singularity.'</p>

<p>[220] 'He had many other particularities, for which he gave sound and
philosophical reasons. As this humour still grew upon him he chose to
wear a turban instead of a periwig; concluding very justly that a
bandage of clean linen about his head was much more wholesome, as well
as cleanly, than the caul of a wig, which is soiled with frequent
perspirations.' <i>Spectator</i>, No. 576.</p>

<p>[221] See <i>post</i>, June 28, 1777, note.</p>

<p>[222] 'Depend upon it,' he said, 'no woman is the worse for sense and
knowledge.' Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 19; 1773—See, however, <i>post</i>,
1780, in Mr. Langton's Collection, where he says:—'Supposing a wife to
be of a studious or argumentative turn, it would be very troublesome'</p>

<p>[223]</p>

<p>'Though Artemisia talks by fits<br/>

Of councils, classics, fathers, wits;<br/>

Reads Malbranche, Boyle, and Locke:<br/>

Yet in some things, methinks she fails;<br/>

'Twere well if she would pare her nails,<br/>

And wear a cleaner smock.'<br/>
</p>

<p>SWIFT. <i>Imitation of English Poets, Works</i>, xxiv. 6.</p>

<p>[224] <i>A Wife</i>, a poem, 1614. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[225] In the original <i>that</i>.</p>

<p>[226] What a succession of compliments was paid by Johnson's old
school-fellow, whom he met a year or two later in Lichfield, who 'has
had, as he phrased it, <i>a matter of four wives</i>, for which' added
Johnson to Mrs. Thrale, 'neither you nor I like him much the better.'
<i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 41.</p>

<p>[227] Mr. Langton married the widow of the Earl of Rothes; <i>post</i>, March
20, 1771.</p>

<p>[228] Horace Walpole, writing of 1764, says:—'As one of my objects was
to raise the popularity of our party, I had inserted a paragraph in the
newspapers observing that the abolition of vails to servants had been
set on foot by the Duke of Bedford, and had been opposed by the Duke of
Devonshire. Soon after a riot happened at Ranelagh, in which the footmen
mobbed and ill-treated some gentlemen who had been active in that
reformation.' <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George III</i>, ii. 3.</p>

<p>[229]</p>

<p>'Alexis shunned his fellow swains,<br/>

Their rural sports and jocund strains,<br/>

(Heaven guard us all from Cupid's bow!)<br/>

He lost his crook, he left his flocks;<br/>

And wandering through the lonely rocks,<br/>

He nourished endless woe.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>The Despairing Shepherd</i>.</p>

<p>[230] 'In his amorous effusions Prior is less happy; for they are not
dictated by nature or by passion, and have neither gallantry nor
tenderness. They have the coldness of Cowley without his wit, the dull
exercises of a skilful versifier, resolved at all adventures to write
something about Chloe, and trying to be amorous by dint of study…. In
his private relaxation he revived the tavern, and in his amorous
pedantry he exhibited the college.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, viii. 15, 22.</p>

<p>[231] <i>Florizel and Perdita</i> is Garrick's version of <i>The Winters Tale</i>.
He cut down the five acts to three. The line, which is misquoted, is in
one of Perdita's songs:—</p>

<p>'That giant ambition we never can dread;<br/>

Our roofs are too low for so lofty a head;<br/>

Content and sweet cheerfulness open our door,<br/>

They smile with the simple, and feed with the poor.'<br/>
</p>

<h5>Act ii. sc. 1.</h5>

<p>[232] Horace. <i>Sat</i>. i. 4. 34.</p>

<p>[233] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 66.</p>

<p>[234] Horace Walpole told Malone that 'he was about twenty-two
[twenty-four] years old when his father retired; and that he remembered
his offering one day to read to him, finding that time hung heavy on his
hands. "What," said he, "will you read, child?" Mr. Walpole, considering
that his father had long been engaged in public business, proposed to
read some history. "No," said he, "don't read history to me; that can't
be true."' Prior's <i>Malone</i>, p. 387. See also <i>post</i>, April 30, 1773,
and Oct. 10, 1779.</p>

<p>[235] See <i>ante</i>, i 75, <i>post</i>, Oct 12, 1779, and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>,
August 15, 1773. Boswell himself had met Whitefield; for mentioning him
in his <i>Letter to the People of Scotland</i> (p. 25), he adds:—'Of whose
pious and animated society I had some share.' Southey thus describes
Whitefield in his <i>Life of Wesley</i> (i. 126):—'His voice excelled both
in melody and compass, and its fine modulations were happily accompanied
by that grace of action which he possessed in an eminent degree, and
which has been said to be the chief requisite of an orator. An ignorant
man described his eloquence oddly but strikingly, when he said that Mr.
Whitefield preached like a lion. So strange a comparison conveyed no
unapt a notion of the force and vehemence and passion of that oratory
which awed the hearers, and made them tremble like Felix before the
apostle.' Benjamin Franklin writes (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 163):—'Mr.
Whitefield's eloquence had a wonderful power over the hearts and purses
of his hearers, of which I myself was an instance.' He happened to be
present at a sermon which, he perceived, was to finish with a collection
for an object which had not his approbation. 'I silently resolved he
should get nothing from me. I had in my pocket a handful of copper
money, three or four silver dollars, and five pistoles in gold. As he
proceeded I began to soften, and concluded to give the copper. Another
stroke of his oratory made me ashamed of that, and determined me to give
the silver; and he finished so admirably that I emptied my pocket wholly
into the collector's dish, gold and all.'</p>

<p>[236] 'What an idea may we not form of an interview between such a
scholar and philosopher as Mr. Johnson, and such a legislatour and
general as Paoli.' Boswell's <i>Corsica</i>, p. 198.</p>

<p>[237] Mr. Stewart, who in 1768 was sent on a secret mission to Paoli, in
his interesting report says:—'Religion seems to sit easy upon Paoli,
and notwithstanding what his historian Boswell relates, I take him to be
very free in his notions that way. This I suspect both from the strain
of his conversation, and from what I have learnt of his conduct towards
the clergy and monks.' Fitzmaurice's <i>Shelburne</i>, ii. 158. See <i>post</i>,
April 14, 1775, where Johnson said:—'Sir, there is a great cry about
infidelity; but there are in reality very few infidels.' Yet not long
before he had complained of an 'inundation of impiety.' Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 30, 1773.</p>

<p>[238] I suppose Johnson said atmosphere. CROKER. In <i>Humphry Clinker</i>,
in the Letter of June 2, there is, however, a somewhat similar use of
the word. Lord Bute is described as 'the Caledonian luminary, that
lately blazed so bright in our hemisphere; methinks, at present, it
glimmers through a fog.' A star, however, unlike a cloud, may pass from
one hemisphere to the other.</p>

<p>[239] See <i>post</i>, under Nov. 5, 1775. Hannah More, writing in 1782
(<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 242), says:—'Paoli will not talk in English, and his
French is mixed with Italian. He speaks no language with purity.'</p>

<p>[240] Horace Walpole writes:—'Paoli had as much ease as suited a
prudence that seemed the utmost effort of a wary understanding, and was
so void of anything remarkable in his aspect, that being asked if I knew
who it was, I judged him a Scottish officer (for he was
sandy-complexioned and in regimentals), who was cautiously awaiting the
moment of promotion.' <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George III</i>, iii. 387</p>

<p>[241] Boswell introduced this subject often. See <i>post</i>, Oct. 26, 1769,
April 15, 1778, March 14, 1781, and June 23, 1784. Like Milton's fallen
angels, he 'found no end, in wand'ring mazes lost.' <i>Paradise Lost</i>,
ii. 561.</p>

<p>[242] 'To this wretched being, himself by his own misconduct lashed out
of human society, the stage was indebted for several very pure and
pleasing entertainments; among them, <i>Love in a Village</i>, <i>The Maid of
the Mill</i>.' Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 136. 'When,' says Mrs. Piozzi
(<i>Anec</i>. p. 168), 'Mr. Bickerstaff's flight confirmed the report of his
guilt, and my husband said in answer to Johnson's astonishment, that he
had long been a suspected man: "By those who look close to the ground
dirt will be seen, Sir, (was his lofty reply); I hope I see things from
a greater distance."' In the <i>Garrick Corres</i> (i. 473) is a piteous
letter in bad French, written from St. Malo, by Bickerstaff to Garrick,
endorsed by Garrick, 'From that poor wretch Bickerstaff: I could not
answer it.'</p>

<p>[243] Boswell, only a couple of years before he published <i>The Life of
Johnson</i>, in fact while he was writing it, had written to Temple:—'I
was the <i>great man</i> (as we used to say) at the late Drawing-room, in a
suit of imperial blue, lined with rose-coloured silk, and ornamented
with rich gold-wrought buttons.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 289.</p>

<p>[244] Miss Reynolds, in her <i>Recollections</i> (Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p.
831), says, 'One day at Sir Joshua Reynolds's Goldsmith was relating
with great indignation an insult he had just received from some
gentleman he had accidentally met. "The fellow," he said, "took me for a
tailor!" on which all the company either laughed aloud or showed they
suppressed a laugh.'</p>

<p>[245] In Prior's <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 232, is given Filby's Bill for a suit
of clothes sent to Goldsmith this very day:—</p>

<p>Oct. 16.—            £  s. d.<br/>

To making a half-dress<br/>

   suit of ratteen, lined<br/>

   with satin         12 12 0<br/>

To a pair of silk stocking<br/>

   breeches            2  5 0<br/>

To a pair of _bloom-coloured<br/>

   ditto               1  4 6<br/>
</p>

<p>Nothing is said in this bill of the colour of the coat; it is the
breeches that are bloom-coloured. The tailor's name was William, not
John, Filby; <i>Ib</i> i. 378, Goldsmith in his <i>Life of Nash</i> had
said:—'Dress has a mechanical influence upon the mind, and we naturally
are awed into respect and esteem at the elegance of those whom even our
reason would teach us to contemn. He seemed early sensible of human
weakness in this respect; he brought a person genteelly dressed to every
assembly.' Cunningham's <i>Goldsmith's Works</i>, iv. 46.</p>

<p>[246] 'The <i>Characters of Men and Women</i> are the product of diligent
speculation upon human life; much labour has been bestowed upon them,
and Pope very seldom laboured in vain…. The <i>Characters of Men</i>,
however, are written with more, if not with deeper thought, and exhibit
many passages exquisitely beautiful…. In the women's part are some
defects.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, viii. 341.</p>

<p>[247] Mr. Langton informed me that he once related to Johnson (on the
authority of Spence), that Pope himself admired those lines so much that
when he repeated them his voice faltered: 'and well it might, Sir,' said
Johnson, 'for they are noble lines.' J. BOSWELL, JUN.</p>

<p>[248] We have here an instance of that reserve which Boswell, in his
Dedication to Sir Joshua Reynolds (<i>ante</i>, i. 4), says that he has
practised. In one particular he had 'found the world to be a great
fool,' and, 'I have therefore,' as he writes, 'in this work been more
reserved;' yet the reserve is slight enough. Everyone guesses that 'one
of the company' was Boswell.</p>

<p>[249] Yet Johnson, in his <i>Life of Pope</i> (<i>Works</i>, viii. 276), seems to
be much of Boswell's opinion; for in writing of <i>The Dunciad</i>, he
says:—'The subject itself had nothing generally interesting, for whom
did it concern to know that one or another scribbler was a dunce?'</p>

<p>[250] The opposite of this Johnson maintained on April 29, 1778.</p>

<p>[251] 'It is surely sufficient for an author of sixteen … to have
obtained sufficient power of language and skill in metre, to exhibit a
series of versification which had in English poetry no precedent, nor
has since had an imitation.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, viii. 326.</p>

<p>[252] See <i>ante</i>, i. 129.</p>

<p>[253] 'If the flights of Dryden are higher, Pope continues longer on the
wing … Dryden is read with frequent astonishment, and Pope with
perpetual delight.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, viii. 325.</p>

<p>[254] Probably, says Mr. Croker, those quoted by Johnson in <i>The Life of
Dryden</i>. <i>Ib</i> vii. 339.</p>

<p>[255] The Duke of Buckingham in Dryden's <i>Absalom and Achitophel</i>.</p>

<p>[256] <i>Prologue to the Satires</i>, I. 193.</p>

<p>[257]</p>

<p>Almeria.—'It was a fancy'd noise; for all is hush'd.</p>

<p>Leonora.—It bore the accent of a human voice.</p>

<p>Almeria.—It was thy fear, or else some transient wind<br/>

Whistling thro' hollows of this vaulted aisle;<br/>

We'll listen—<br/>
</p>

<p>Leonora.—Hark!</p>

<p>Almeria.—No, all is hush'd and still as death,—'Tis dreadful!<br/>

How reverend is the face of this tall pile,<br/>

Whose ancient pillars rear their marble heads,<br/>

To bear aloft its arch'd and ponderous roof,<br/>

By its own weight made stedfast and immoveable,<br/>

Looking tranquillity! It strikes an awe<br/>

And terror on my aching sight; the tombs<br/>

And monumental caves of death look cold,<br/>

And shoot a chillness to my trembling heart.<br/>

Give me thy hand, and let me hear thy voice;<br/>

Nay, quickly speak to me, and let me hear<br/>

Thy voice—my own affrights me with its echoes.<br/>
</p>

<h5>Act ii. sc. 1.</h5>

<p>[258]</p>

<p>'Swear by thy gracious self,<br/>

Which is the god of my idolatry.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Romeo and Juliet</i>, act ii. sc. 2. He was a God with whom he ventured to
take great liberties. Thus on Jan. 10, 1776, he wrote:—'I have ventured
to produce <i>Hamlet</i> with alterations. It was the most imprudent thing I
ever did in all my life; but I had sworn I would not leave the stage
till I had rescued that noble play from all the rubbish of the fifth
act. I have brought it forth without the grave-digger's trick and the
fencing match. The alterations were received with general approbation
beyond my most warm expectations.' <i>Garrick Corres</i>., ii. 126. See
<i>ante</i>, ii. 78, note 4.</p>

<p>[259] This comparison between Shakespeare and Congreve is mentioned
perhaps oftener than any passage in Boswell. Almost as often as it is
mentioned, it may be seen that Johnson's real opinion is misrepresented
or misunderstood. A few passages from his writings will shew how he
regarded the two men. In the <i>Life of Congreve</i> (<i>Works</i>, viii. 31) he
repeats what he says here:—'If I were required to select from the whole
mass of English poetry the most poetical paragraph, I know not what I
could prefer to an exclamation in <i>The Mourning Bride</i>.' Yet in writing
of the same play, he says:—'In this play there is more bustle than
sentiment; the plot is busy and intricate, and the events take hold on
the attention; but, except a very few passages, we are rather amused
with noise and perplexed with stratagem, than entertained with any true
delineation of natural characters.' <i>Ib</i>, p. 26. In the preface to his
<i>Shakespeare</i>, published four years before this conversation, he almost
answered Garrick by anticipation. 'It was said of Euripides that every
verse was a precept; and it may be said of Shakespeare, that from his
works may be collected a system of civil and economical prudence. Yet
his real power is not shown in the splendour of particular passages, but
by the progress of his fable, and the tenour of his dialogue, and he
that tries to recommend him by select quotations, will succeed like the
pedant in <i>Hierocles</i>, who, when he offered his house to sale, carried a
brick in his pocket as a specimen.' <i>Ib</i>, v. 106. Ignorant, indeed, is
he who thinks that Johnson was insensible to Shakespeare's 'transcendent
and unbounded genius,' to use the words that he himself applied to him.
<i>The Rambler</i>, No. 156. 'It may be doubtful,' he writes, 'whether from
all his successors more maxims of theoretical knowledge, or more rules
of practical prudence, can be collected than he alone has given to his
country.' <i>Works</i>, v. 131. 'He that has read Shakespeare with attention
will, perhaps, find little new in the crowded world.' <i>Ib</i>, p. 434. 'Let
him that is yet unacquainted with the powers of Shakespeare, and who
desires to feel the highest pleasure that the drama can give, read every
play, from the first scene to the last, with utter negligence of all his
commentators. When his fancy is once on the wing, let it not stoop at
correction or explanation.' <i>Ib</i>, p. 152. And lastly he quotes Dryden's
words [from Dryden's <i>Essay of Dramatick Poesie</i>, edit. of 1701, i. 19]
'that Shakespeare was the man who, of all modern and perhaps ancient
poets, had the largest and most comprehensive soul.' <i>Ib</i>, p. 153. Mrs.
Piozzi records (<i>Anec</i>., p. 58), that she 'forced Johnson one day in a
similar humour [to that in which he had praised Congreve] to prefer
Young's description of night to those of Shakespeare and Dryden.' He
ended however by saying:—'Young froths and foams and bubbles sometimes
very vigorously; but we must not compare the noise made by your
tea-kettle here with the roaring of the ocean.' See also <i>post</i>, p. 96.</p>

<p>[260] <i>Henry V</i>, act iv., Prologue.</p>

<p>[261] <i>Romeo and Juliet</i>, act iv., sc. 3.</p>

<p>[262] <i>King Lear</i>, act iv., sc. 6.</p>

<p>[263] See <i>ante</i>, July 26, 1763.</p>

<p>[264] See <i>ante</i>, i. 388.</p>

<p>[265] In spite of the gross nonsense that Voltaire has written about
Shakespeare, yet it was with justice that in a letter to Horace Walpole
(dated July 15, 1768,) he said:—'Je suis le premier qui ait fait
connaître Shakespeare aux Français…. Je peux vous assurer qu'avant moi
personne en France ne connaissait la poésie anglaise.' Voltaire's
<i>Works</i>, liv. 513.</p>

<p>[266] 'Of whom I acknowledge myself to be one, considering it as a piece
of the secondary or comparative species of criticism; and not of that
profound species which alone Dr. Johnson would allow to be "real
criticism." It is, besides, clearly and elegantly expressed, and has
done effectually what it professed to do, namely, vindicated Shakespeare
from the misrepresentations of Voltaire; and considering how many young
people were misled by his witty, though false observations, Mrs.
Montagu's Essay was of service to Shakspeare with a certain class of
readers, and is, therefore, entitled to praise. Johnson, I am assured,
allowed the merit which I have stated, saying, (with reference to
Voltaire,) "it is conclusive <i>ad hominem</i>."' BOSWELL. That this dull
essay, which would not do credit to a clever school-girl of seventeen,
should have had a fame, of which the echoes have not yet quite died out,
can only be fully explained by Mrs. Montagu's great wealth and position
in society. Contemptible as was her essay, yet a saying of hers about
Voltaire was clever. 'He sent to the Academy an invective [against
Shakespeare] that bears all the marks of passionate dotage. Mrs. Montagu
happened to be present when it was read. Suard, one of their writers,
said to her, "Je crois, Madame, que vous êtes un peu fâché (sic) de ce
que vous venez d'entendre." She replied, "Moi, Monsieur! point du tout!
Je ne suis pas amie de M. Voltaire."' Walpole's <i>Letters</i>, vi. 394. Her
own <i>Letters</i> are very pompous and very poor, and her wit would not seem
to have flashed often; for Miss Burney wrote of her:—'She reasons well,
and harangues well, but wit she has none.' Mme. D'Arblay's <i>Diary</i>, i.
335. Yet in this same <i>Diary</i> (i. 112) we find evidence of the absurdly
high estimate that was commonly formed of her. 'Mrs. Thrale asked me if
I did not want to see Mrs. Montagu. I truly said, I should be the most
insensible of all animals not to like to see our sex's glory.' That she
was a very extraordinary woman we have Johnson's word for it. (See
<i>post</i>, May 15, 1784.) It is impossible, however, to discover anything
that rises above commonplace in anything that she wrote, and, so far as
I know, that she said, with the exception of her one saying about
Voltaire. Johnson himself, in one of his letters to Mrs. Thrale, has a
laugh at her. He had mentioned Shakespeare, nature and friendship, and
continues:—'Now, of whom shall I proceed to speak? Of whom but Mrs.
Montagu? Having mentioned Shakespeare and Nature, does not the name of
Montagu force itself upon me? Such were the transitions of the ancients,
which now seem abrupt, because the intermediate idea is lost to modern
understandings. I wish her name had connected itself with friendship;
but, ah Colin, thy hopes are in vain.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 101. See
<i>post</i>, April 7, 1778.</p>

<p>[267] 'Reynolds is fond of her book, and I wonder at it; for neither I,
nor Beauclerk, nor Mrs. Thrale, could get through it.' Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 23, 1773.</p>

<p>[268] Lord Kames is 'the Scotchman.' See <i>ante</i>, i. 393.</p>

<p>[269] 'When Charles Townshend read some of Lord Kames's <i>Elements of
Criticism</i>, he said:—"This is the work of a dull man grown
whimsical"—a most characteristical account of Lord Kames as a writer.'
<i>Boswelliana</i>, p. 278. Hume wrote of it:—'Some parts of the work are
ingenious and curious; but it is too abstruse and crabbed ever to take
with the public.' J. H. Burton's <i>Hume</i>, ii. 131. 'Kames,' he says, 'had
much provoked Voltaire, who never forgives, and never thinks any enemy
below his notice.' <i>Ib</i>, p. 195. Voltaire (<i>Works</i>, xliii. 302) thus
ridicules his book:—'Il nous prouve d'abord que nous avons cinq sens,
et que nous sentons moins l'impression douce faite sur nos yeux et sur
nos oreilles par les couleurs et par les sons que nous ne sentons un
grand coup sur la jambe ou sur la tête.'</p>

<p>[270] L'Abbé Dubos, 1670-1742. 'Tous les artistes lisent avec fruit ses
<i>Réflexions sur la poésie, la peinture, et la musique</i>. C'est le livre
le plus utile qu'on ait jamais écrit sur ces matières chez aucune des
nations de l'Europe.' Voltaire's <i>Siècle de Louis XIV</i>, i. 81.</p>

<p>[271] Bouhours, 1628-1702. Voltaire, writing of Bouhours' <i>Manière de
bien penser sur les ouvrages d'esprit</i>, says that he teaches young
people 'à éviter l'enflure, l'obscurité, le recherché, et le faux.'
<i>Ib</i>, p. 54. Johnson, perhaps, knew him, through <i>The Spectator</i>, No.
62, where it is said that he has shown 'that it is impossible for any
thought to be beautiful which is not just, … that the basis of all wit
is truth.'</p>

<p>[272] <i>Macbeth</i>, act iii. sc. 2.</p>

<p>[273] In <i>The False Alarm</i>, that was published less than three months
after this conversation, Johnson describes how petitions were got. 'The
progress of a petition is well known. An ejected placeman goes down to
his county or his borough, tells his friends of his inability to serve
them, and his constituents of the corruption of the Government. His
friends readily understand that he who can get nothing will have nothing
to give. They agree to proclaim a meeting; meat and drink are
plentifully provided, a crowd is easily brought together, and those who
think that they know the reason of their meeting, undertake to tell
those who know it not; ale and clamour unite their powers…. The
petition is read, and universally approved. Those who are sober enough
to write, add their names, and the rest would sign it if they could.'
<i>Works</i>, vi. 172. Yet, when the petitions for Dr. Dodd's life were
rejected, Johnson said:—'Surely the voice of the public when it calls
so loudly, and calls only for mercy, ought to be heard.' <i>Post</i>, June
28, 1777. Horace Walpole, writing of the numerous petitions presented to
the King this year (1769), blames 'an example so inconsistent with the
principles of liberty, as appealing to the Crown against the House of
Commons.' Some of them prayed for a dissolution of Parliament. <i>Memoirs
of the Reign of George III</i>, iii. 382, 390. Two years earlier Lord
Shelburne, when Secretary of State, had found among the subscribers to a
petition for his impeachment, a friend of his, a London alderman. 'Oh!
aye,' said the alderman when asked for an explanation, 'I did sign a
petition at the Royal Exchange, which they told me was for the
impeachment of a Minister; I always sign a petition to impeach a
Minister, and I recollect that as soon as I had subscribed it, twenty
more put their names to it.' <i>Parl. Hist</i>., xxxv. 167.</p>

<p>[274] See <i>post</i>, under March 24, 1776.</p>

<p>[275] Mr. Robert Chambers says that the author of the ballad was
Elizabeth Halket, wife of Sir Henry Wardlaw. She died about 1727. 'The
ballad of Hardyknute was the first poem I ever read, and it will be the
last I shall forget.' SIR WALTER SCOTT. Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 205.</p>

<p>[276] John Ray published, in 1674, <i>A Collection of English Words</i>, &amp;c.,
and <i>A Collection of English Proverbs</i>. In 1768 the two were published
in one volume.</p>

<p>[277] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 23, 1773.</p>

<p>[278]</p>

<p>'Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player<br/>

That struts and frets his hour upon the stage.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Macbeth</i>, Act v. se. 5.</p>

<p>[279] In the <i>Garrick Corres</i>., i. 385, there is a letter from Mrs.
Montagu to Garrick, which shows the ridiculous way in which Shakespeare
was often patronised last century, and 'brought into notice.' She
says:—'Mrs. Montagu is a little jealous for poor Shakespeare, for if
Mr. Garrick often acts Kitely, Ben Jonson will eclipse his fame.'</p>

<p>[280] 'Familiar comedy is often more powerful on the theatre than in the
page; imperial tragedy is always less.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, v. 122. See
also Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, August 15 and 16, 1773, where Johnson
'displayed another of his heterodox opinions—a contempt of tragick
acting.' Murphy (<i>Life</i>, p. 145) thus writes of Johnson's slighting
Garrick and the stage:—'The fact was, Johnson could not see the
passions as they rose and chased one another in the varied features of
that expressive face; and by his own manner of reciting verses, which
was wonderfully impressive, he plainly showed that he thought there was
too much of artificial tone and measured cadence in the declamation of
the theatre.' Reynolds said of Johnson's recitation, that 'it had no
more tone than it should the have.' Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 26, 1773.
See <i>post</i>, April 3, 1773.</p>

<p>[281] See <i>post</i>, April 6, 1775, where Johnson, speaking of Cibber's
'talents of conversation,' said:—'He had but half to furnish; for one
half of what he said was oaths.'</p>

<p>[282] See <i>ante</i>, June 13, 1763.</p>

<p>[283] See <i>post</i>, Sept. 21, 1777.</p>

<p>[284] On Oct. 18, one day, not two days before, four men were hanged at
Tyburn for robbery on the highway, one for stealing money and linen, and
one for forgery. <i>Gent. Mag</i>., xxxix. 508. Boswell, in <i>The
Hypochondriack</i>, No. 68 (<i>London Mag</i>. for 1783, p. 203), republishes a
letter which he had written on April 25, 1768, to the <i>Public
Advertiser</i>, after he had witnessed the execution of an attorney named
Gibbon, and a youthful highwayman. He says:—'I must confess that I
myself am never absent from a public execution…. When I first attended
them, I was shocked to the greatest degree. I was in a manner convulsed
with pity and terror, and for several days, but especially nights after,
I was in a very dismal situation. Still, however, I persisted in
attending them, and by degrees my sensibility abated, so that I can now
see one with great composure. I can account for this curiosity in a
philosophical manner, when I consider that death is the most awful
object before every man, whoever directs his thoughts seriously towards
futurity. Therefore it is that I feel an irresistible impulse to be
present at every execution, as I there behold the various effects of the
near approach of death.' He maintains 'that the curiosity which impels
people to be present at such affecting scenes, is certainly a proof of
sensibility, not of callousness. For, it is observed, that the greatest
proportion of the spectators is composed of women.' See <i>post</i>, June
23, 1784.</p>

<p>[285] Of Johnson, perhaps, might almost be said what he said of Swift
(<i>Works</i>, viii. 207):—'The thoughts of death rushed upon him at this
time with such incessant importunity that they took possession of his
mind, when he first waked, for many hours together.' Writing to Mrs.
Thrale from Lichfield on Oct. 27, 1781, he says:—'All here is gloomy; a
faint struggle with the tediousness of time, a doleful confession of
present misery, and the approach seen and felt of what is most dreaded
and most shunned. But such is the lot of man.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>,
ii. 209.</p>

<p>[286] Johnson, during a serious illness, thus wrote to Mrs.
Thrale:—'When any man finds himself disposed to complain with how
little care he is regarded, let him reflect how little he contributed to
the happiness of others, and how little, for the most part, he suffers
from their pain. It is perhaps not to be lamented that those solicitudes
are not long nor frequent which must commonly be vain; nor can we wonder
that, in a state in which all have so much to feel of their own evils,
very few have leisure for those of another.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 14.
See <i>post</i>, Sept. 14, 1777.</p>

<p>[287] 'I was shocked to find a letter from Dr. Holland, to the effect
that poor Harry Hallam is dying at Sienna [Vienna]. What a trial for my
dear old friend! I feel for the lad himself, too. Much distressed. I
dined, however. We dine, unless the blow comes very, very near the heart
indeed.' Macaulay's <i>Life</i>, ii. 287. See also <i>ante</i>, i. 355.</p>

<p>[288] See <i>post</i>, Feb. 24, 1773, for 'a furious quarrel' between Davies
and Baretti.</p>

<p>[289] Foote, two or three years before this, had lost one leg through an
accident in hunting. Forster's <i>Essays</i>, ii. 398. See <i>post</i>, under
Feb. 7, 1775.</p>

<p>[290] When Mr. Foote was at Edinburgh, he thought fit to entertain a
numerous Scotch company, with a great deal of coarse jocularity, at the
expense of Dr. Johnson, imagining it would be acceptable. I felt this as
not civil to me; but sat very patiently till he had exhausted his
merriment on that subject; and then observed, that surely Johnson must
be allowed to have some sterling wit, and that I had heard him say a
very good thing of Mr. Foote himself. 'Ah, my old friend Sam (cried
Foote), no man says better things; do let us have it.' Upon which I told
the above story, which produced a very loud laugh from the company. But
I never saw Foote so disconcerted. He looked grave and angry, and
entered into a serious refutation of the justice of the remark. 'What,
Sir, (said he), talk thus of a man of liberal education;—a man who for
years was at the University of Oxford;—a man who has added sixteen new
characters to the English drama of his country!' BOSWELL.</p>

<p>Foote was at Worcester College, but he left without taking his degree.
He was constantly in scrapes. When the Provost, Dr. Gower, who was a
pedant, sent for him to reprimand him, 'Foote would present himself with
great apparent gravity and submission, but with a large dictionary under
his arm; when, on the doctor beginning in his usual pompous manner with
a surprisingly long word, he would immediately interrupt him, and, after
begging pardon with great formality, would produce his dictionary, and
pretending to find the meaning of the word, would say, "Very well, Sir;
now please to go on."' Forster's <i>Essays</i>, ii. 307. Dr. Gower is
mentioned by Dr. King (<i>Anec</i>., p. 174) as one of the three persons he
had known 'who spoke English with that elegance and propriety, that if
all they said had been immediately committed to writing, any judge of
the language would have pronounced it an excellent and very beautiful
style.' The other two were Bishop Atterbury and Dr. Johnson.</p>

<p>[291] <i>Cento</i>. A composition formed by joining scrapes from other
authours.' Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>.</p>

<p>[292] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 30, 1773.</p>

<p>[293] For the position of these chaplains see <i>The Tatler</i>, No. 255, and
<i>The Guardian</i>, No. 163.</p>

<p>[294] 'He had been assailed in the grossest manner possible by a woman
of the town, and, driving her off with a blow, was set upon by three
bullies. He thereupon ran away in great fear, for he was a timid man,
and being pursued, had stabbed two of the men with a small knife he
carried in his pocket.' Garrick and Beauclerk testified that every one
abroad carried such a knife, for in foreign inns only forks were
provided. 'When you travel abroad do you carry such knives as this?'
Garrick was asked. 'Yes,' he answered, 'or we should have no victuals.'
<i>Dr. Johnson: His Friends and His Critics</i>, p. 288. I have extracted
from the <i>Sessional Reports</i> for 1769, p. 431, the following evidence as
to Baretti's character:—'SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS. I have known Mr. Baretti
fifteen or sixteen years. He is a man of great humanity, and very active
in endeavouring to help his friends. He is a gentleman of a good temper;
I never knew him quarrelsome in my life; he is of a sober
disposition…. This affair was on a club night of the Royal
Academicians. We expected him there, and were inquiring about him before
we heard of this accident. He is secretary for foreign correspondence.'
'DR. JOHNSON. I believe I began to be acquainted with Mr. Baretti about
the year '53 or '54. I have been intimate with him. He is a man of
literature, a very studious man, a man of great diligence. He gets his
living by study. I have no reason to think he was ever disordered with
liquor in his life. A man that I never knew to be otherwise than
peaceable, and a man that I take to be rather timorous.' Qu. 'Was he
addicted to pick up women in the street?' 'Dr. J. I never knew that he
was.' Qu. 'How is he as to his eye-sight?' 'Dr. J. He does not see me
now, nor I do not [sic] see him. I do not believe he could be capable of
assaulting anybody in the street without great provocation.' 'EDMUND
BURKE, ESQ. I have known him between three and four years; he is an
ingenious man, a man of remarkable humanity—a thorough good-natured
man.' 'DAVID GARRICK, ESQ. I never knew a man of a more active
benevolence…. He is a man of great probity and morals.' 'DR.
GOLDSMITH. I have had the honour of Mr. Baretti's company at my chambers
in the Temple. He is a most humane, benevolent, peaceable man…. He is
a man of as great humanity as any in the world.' Mr. Fitzherbert and Dr.
Hallifax also gave evidence. 'There were divers other gentlemen in court
to speak for his character, but the Court thought it needless to call
them.' It is curious that Boswell passes over Reynolds and Goldsmith
among the witnesses. Baretti's bail before Lord Mansfield were Burke,
Garrick, Reynolds, and Fitzherbert. Mrs. Piozzi tells the following
anecdotes of Baretti:—'When Johnson and Burke went to see him in
Newgate, they had small comfort to give him, and bid him not hope too
strongly. "Why, what can <i>he</i> fear," says Baretti, placing himself
between them, "that holds two such hands as I do?" An Italian came one
day to Baretti, when he was in Newgate, to desire a letter of
recommendation for the teaching his scholars, when he (Baretti) should
be hanged. "You rascal," replies Baretti in a rage, "if I were not <i>in
my own apartment</i>, I would kick you down stairs directly."' Hayward's
<i>Piazzi</i>, ii. 348. Dr. T. Campbell, in his <i>Diary</i> (p. 52), wrote on
April 1, 1775:—'Boswell and Baretti, as I learned, are mortal foes; so
much so that Murphy and Mrs. Thrale agreed that Boswell expressed a
desire that Baretti should be hanged upon that unfortunate affair of his
killing, &amp;c.'</p>

<p>[295] Lord Auchinleck, we may assume. Johnson said of Pope, that 'he was
one of those few whose labor is their pleasure.' <i>Works</i>, viii. 321.</p>

<p>[296] I have since had reason to think that I was mistaken; for I have
been informed by a lady, who was long intimate with her, and likely to
be a more accurate observer of such matters, that she had acquired such
a niceness of touch, as to know, by the feeling on the outside of the
cup, how near it was to being full. BOSWELL. Baretti, in a MS. note on
<i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 84, says:—'I dined with Dr. Johnson as seldom as
I could, though often scolded for it; but I hated to see the victuals
pawed by poor Mrs. Williams, that would often carve, though
stone blind.'</p>

<p>[297] See <i>ante</i>, July 1 and Aug. 2, 1763.</p>

<p>[298] See <i>ante</i>, i. 232.</p>

<p>[299] An Italian quack who in 1765 established medicated baths in Cheney
Walk, Chelsea. CROKER.</p>

<p>[300] The same saying is recorded <i>post</i>, May 15, 1784, and in Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 5, 1773. 'Cooke reports another saying of Goldsmith's
to the same effect:—"There's no chance for you in arguing with Johnson.
Like the Tartar horse, if he does not conquer you in front, his kick
from behind is sure to be fatal."' Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 167. 'In
arguing,' wrote Sir Joshua Reynolds, 'Johnson did not trouble himself
with much circumlocution, but opposed directly and abruptly his
antagonist. He fought with all sorts of weapons—ludicrous comparisons
and similies; if all failed, with rudeness and overbearing. He thought
it necessary never to be worsted in argument. He had one virtue which I
hold one of the most difficult to practise. After the heat of contest
was over, if he had been informed that his antagonist resented his
rudeness, he was the first to seek after a reconciliation…. That he
was not thus strenuous for victory with his intimates in tête-à-tête
conversations when there were no witnesses, may be easily believed.
Indeed, had his conduct been to them the same as he exhibited to the
public, his friends could never have entertained that love and affection
for him which they all feel and profess for his memory.' Taylor's
<i>Reynolds</i>, ii. 457, 462.</p>

<p>[301] He had written the <i>Introduction</i> to it. <i>Ante</i>, p. 317.</p>

<p>[302] See <i>post</i>, beginning of 1770.</p>

<p>[303] He accompanied Boswell on his tour to the Hebrides. Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 18, 1773.</p>

<p>[304] While he was in Scotland he never entered one of the churches. 'I
will not give a sanction,' he said, 'by my presence, to a Presbyterian
assembly.' <i>Ib</i> Aug. 27, 1773. When he was in France he went to a Roman
Catholic service; <i>post</i>, Oct. 29, 1775.</p>

<p>[305] See <i>post</i>, March 21, 1772.</p>

<p>[306] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 82.</p>

<p>[307] See <i>post</i>, March 27, 1772.</p>

<p>[308] See <i>post</i>, May 7, 1773, Oct. 10, 1779, and June 9, 1784.</p>

<p>[309] <i>St. James</i>, v. 16.</p>

<p>[310] See <i>post</i>, June 28, 1777, note.</p>

<p>[311] Laceration was properly a term of surgery; hence the italics. See
<i>post</i>, Jan. 20, 1780.</p>

<p>[312] See <i>post</i>, April 15, 1778.</p>

<p>[313] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 12, 1773.</p>

<p>[314] He bids us pray 'For faith that panting for a happier seat, Counts
death kind nature's signal of retreat.'</p>

<p>[315]</p>

<p>'To die is landing on some silent shore,<br/>

Where billows never beat, nor tempests roar,<br/>

Ere well we feel the friendly stroke, 'tis o'er.'<br/>
</p>

<p>GARTH. Quoted in Johnson's <i>Works</i>, vi. 61. Bacon, if he was the author
of <i>An Essay on Death</i>, says, 'I do not believe that any man fears to be
dead, but only the stroke of death.' Spedding's <i>Bacon</i>, vi. 600. Cicero
(<i>Tuscul. Quaest</i>. i. 8) quotes Epicharmus's saying:—'Emori nolo, sed
me esse mortuum nihil aestimo.'</p>

<p>[316] See <i>post</i>, beginning of 1773.</p>

<p>[317] See <i>post</i>, April 17, 1778.</p>

<p>[318] Perhaps <i>on</i> is a misprint for <i>or</i>.</p>

<p>[319] Johnson says of Blackmore (<i>Works</i>, viii. 36) that 'he is one of
those men whose lot it has been to be much oftener mentioned by enemies
than by friends.'</p>

<p>[320] This account Johnson says he had from an eminent bookseller, who
had it from Ambrose Philips the poet. 'The relation of Philips,' he
adds, 'I suppose was true; but when all reasonable, all credible
allowance is made for this friendly revision, the author will still
retain an ample dividend of praise…. Correction seldom effects more
than the suppression of faults: a happy line, or a single elegance, may
perhaps be added, but of a large work the general character must always
remain.' <i>Works</i>, viii. 41.</p>

<p>[321] An acute correspondent of the <i>European Magazine</i>, April, 1792,
has completely exposed a mistake which has been unaccountably frequent
in ascribing these lines to Blackmore, notwithstanding that Sir Richard
Steele, in that very popular work, <i>The Spectator</i>, mentions them as
written by the Authour of The British Princes, the Honourable Edward
Howard. The correspondent above mentioned, shews this mistake to be so
inveterate, that not only <i>I</i> defended the lines as Blackmore's, in the
presence of Dr. Johnson, without any contradiction or doubt of their
authenticity, but that the Reverend Mr. Whitaker has asserted in print,
that he understands they were <i>suppressed</i> in the late edition or
editions of Blackmore. 'After all (says this intelligent writer) it is
not unworthy of particular observation, that these lines so often quoted
do not exist either in Blackmore or Howard.' In <i>The British Princes</i>,
8vo. 1669, now before me, p. 96, they stand thus:—</p>

<p>'A vest as admired Voltiger had on, Which, from this Island's foes, his
grandsire won, Whose artful colour pass'd the Tyrian dye, Oblig'd to
triumph in this legacy.'</p>

<p>It is probable, I think, that some wag, in order to make Howard still
more ridiculous than he really was, has formed the couplet as it now
circulates. BOSWELL. Swift in his <i>Poetry: A Rhapsody</i>, thus joins
Howard and Blackmore together:—</p>

<p>'Remains a difficulty still,<br/>

To purchase fame by writing ill.<br/>

From Flecknoe down to Howard's time<br/>

How few have reached the low sublime!<br/>

For when our high-born Howard died,<br/>

Blackmore alone his place supplied.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Swift's Works</i> (1803), xi. 296.</p>

<p>[322] Boswell seems to have borrowed the notion from <i>The Spectator</i>,
No. 43, where Steele, after saying that the poet blundered because he
was 'vivacious as well as stupid,' continues:—'A fool of a colder
constitution would have staid to have flayed the Pict, and made buff of
his skin for the wearing of the conqueror.'</p>

<p>[323] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 100, note 1.</p>

<p>[324] Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 97) tells how one day at Streatham 'when
he was musing over the fire, a young gentleman called to him suddenly,
and I suppose he thought disrespectfully, in these words:—"Mr.
Johnson, would you advise me to marry?" "I would advise no man to marry,
Sir," returns for answer in a very angry tone Dr. Johnson, "who is not
likely to propagate understanding," and so left the room. Our companion
looked confounded, and I believe had scarce recovered the consciousness
of his own existence, when Johnson came back, and drawing his chair
among us, with altered looks and a softened voice, joined in the general
chat, insensibly led the conversation to the subject of marriage, where
he laid himself out in a dissertation so useful, so elegant, so founded
on the true knowledge of human life, and so adorned with beauty of
sentiment, that no one ever recollected the offence except to rejoice in
its consequences.' This 'young gentleman,' according to Mr. Hayward
(Mrs. Piozzi's <i>Auto</i>. i. 69), was Sir John Lade, the hero of the ballad
which Johnson recited on his death-bed. For other instances of Johnson's
seeking a reconciliation, see <i>post</i>, May 7, 1773, and April 12 and
May 8, 1778.</p>

<p>[325] '<i>The False Alarm</i>, his first and favourite pamphlet, was written
at our house between eight o'clock on Wednesday night and twelve o'clock
on Thursday night. We read it to Mr. Thrale when he came very late home
from the House of Commons.' Piozzi's <i>Anec</i>. p. 41. See also <i>post</i>,
Nov. 26, 1774, where Johnson says that '<i>The Patriot</i> was called for by
my political friends on Friday, was written on Saturday.'</p>

<p>[326] Wilkes was first elected member for Middlesex at the General
Election of March, 1768. He did not take his seat, having been thrown
into prison before Parliament met. On Feb. 3, 1769, he was declared
incapable of being elected, and a new writ was ordered. On Feb. 16 he
was again elected, and without opposition. His election was again
declared void. On March 16 he was a third time elected, and without
opposition. His election was again declared void. On April 13 he was a
fourth time elected by 1143 votes against 296 given for Colonel
Luttrell. On the 14th the poll taken for him was declared null and void,
and on the 15th, Colonel Luttrell was declared duly elected. <i>Parl.
Hist</i>. xvi. 437, and Almon's <i>Wilkes</i>, iv. 4. See <i>post</i>, Oct. 12, 1779.</p>

<p>[327] The resolution of expulsion was carried on Feb. 17, 1769. <i>Parl.
Hist</i>. xvi. 577. It was expunged on May 3, 1782. <i>Ib</i> xxii. 1407.</p>

<p>[328] In the original it is not <i>rulers</i>, but <i>railers</i>. Johnson's
<i>Works</i>, vi. 176.</p>

<p>[329] How slight the change of system was is shown by a passage in
Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 388. Mr. Forster mentions a 'memorial in
favour of the most worthless of hack-partizans, Shebbeare, which
obtained for him his pension of £200 a year. It is signed by fifteen
members of the House of Commons, and it asks for a pension "that he may
be enabled to pursue that laudable <i>inclination which he has</i> of
manifesting his zeal for the service of his Majesty and his Government";
in other words, that a rascal shall be bribed to support a corrupt
administration.' Horace Walpole, in 1757 (<i>Letters</i>, iii. 54), described
Shebbeare as one 'who made a pious resolution of writing himself into a
place or the pillory, but who miscarried in both views.' He added in a
note, 'he did write himself into a pillory before the conclusion of that
reign, and into a pension at the beginning of the next, for one and the
same kind of merit—writing against King William and the Revolution.'
See also <i>post</i>, end of May, 1781.</p>

<p>[330] Johnson could scarcely be soothed by lines such as the
following:—</p>

<p>'Never wilt thou retain the hoarded store,<br/>

In virtue affluent, but in metal poor;<br/>

       *       *       *       *       *<br/>

Great is thy prose; great thy poetic strain,<br/>

Yet to dull coxcombs are they great in vain.<br/>
</p>

<p>[331] Stockdale, who was born in 1736 and died in 1811, wrote <i>Memoirs
of his Life</i>—a long, dull book, but containing a few interesting
anecdotes of Johnson. He thought himself, and the world also, much
ill-used by the publishers, when they passed him over and chose Johnson
to edit the <i>Lives of the Poets</i>. He lodged both in Johnson's Court and
in Bolt Court, but preserved little good-will for his neighbour.
Johnson, in the <i>Life of Waller</i> (<i>Works</i>, vii. 194), quoting from
Stockdale's <i>Life</i> of that poet, calls him 'his last ingenious
biographer.' I. D'Israeli says that 'the bookseller Flexney complained
that whenever this poet came to town, it cost him £20. Flexney had been
the publisher of Churchill's <i>Works</i>, and never forgetting the time when
he published <i>The Rosciad</i>, he was speculating all his life for another
Churchill and another quarto poem. Stockdale usually brought him what he
wanted, and Flexney found the workman, but never the work.' <i>Calamities
of Authors</i>, ed. 1812, ii. 314.</p>

<p>[332] 'I believe most men may review all the lives that have passed
within their observation without remembering one efficacious resolution,
or being able to tell a single instance of a course of practice suddenly
changed in consequence of a change of opinion, or an establishment of
determination.' <i>Idler</i>, No. 27. 'These sorrowful meditations fastened
upon Rasselas's mind; he passed four months in resolving to lose no more
time in idle resolves.' <i>Rasselas</i>, ch. iv.</p>

<p>[333] <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 95. [p. 101.] BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[334] See <i>ante</i>, i. 368.</p>

<p>[335] The passage remains unrevised in the second edition.</p>

<p>[336] Johnson had suffered greatly from rheumatism this year, as well as
from other disorders. He mentions 'spasms in the stomach which disturbed
me for many years, and for two past harassed me almost to distraction.'
These, however, by means of a strong remedy, had at Easter nearly
ceased. 'The pain,' he adds, 'harrasses me much; yet many leave the
disease perhaps in a much higher degree, with want of food, fire, and
covering, which I find also grievous, with all the succours that riches
kindness can buy and give.' (He was staying at Mr. Thrale's) <i>Pr. and
Med</i>. pp. 92-95. 'Shall I ever,' he asks on Easter Day, 'receive the
Sacrament with tranquility? Surely the time will come.' <i>Ib</i> p. 99.</p>

<p>[337] Son of the learned Mrs. Grierson, who was patronised by the late
Lord Granville, and was the editor of several of the Classicks. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[338]</p>

<p>'Pontificum libros, annosa volumina vatum,<br/>

Dictitet Albano Musas in monte locutas.'<br/>

'Then swear transported that the sacred Nine<br/>

Pronounced on Alba's top each hallowed line.'<br/>
</p>

<p>FRANCIS. Horace, <i>Epis</i>. II. i. 26.</p>

<p>[339] See <i>ante</i>, i. 131, where Boswell says that 'Johnson afterwards
honestly acknowledged the merit of Walpole.'</p>

<p>[340] See <i>post</i>, May 15, 1783.</p>

<p>[341] 'His acquaintance was sought by persons of the first eminence in
literature; and his house, in respect of the conversations there, became
an academy.' Hawkins's <i>Johnson</i>, p. 329. See <i>ante</i>, i. 247, 350,
note 3.</p>

<p>[342] Probably Madame de Boufflers. See <i>post</i>, under November 12, 1775.</p>

<p>[343] 'To talk in publick, to think in solitude, to read and hear, to
inquire and answer inquiries, is the business of a scholar.' <i>Rasselas</i>,
ch. viii. Miss Burney mentions an amusing instance of a consultation by
letter. 'The letter was dated from the Orkneys, and cost Dr. Johnson
eighteen pence. The writer, a clergyman, says he labours under a most
peculiar misfortune, for which he can give no account, and which is
that, though he very often writes letters to his friends and others, he
never gets any answers. He entreats, therefore, that Dr. Johnson will
take this into consideration, and explain to him to what so strange a
thing may be attributed.' Mme. D'Arblay's <i>Diary</i>, ii. 96.</p>

<p>[344] 'How he [Swift] spent the rest of his time, and how he employed
his hours of study, has been inquired with hopeless curiosity. For who
can give an account of another's studies? Swift was not likely to admit
any to his privacies, or to impart a minute account of his business or
his leisure.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, viii. 208.</p>

<p>[345] See <i>post</i>, March 31, 1772.</p>

<p>[346] 'He loved the poor,' says Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 84), 'as I never
yet saw any one else do, with an earnest desire to make them happy.
"What signifies," says some one, "giving half-pence to common beggars?
they only lay it out in gin or tobacco." "And why should they be denied
such sweeteners of their existence?" says Johnson.' The harm done by
this indiscriminate charity had been pointed out by Fielding in his
<i>Covent Garden Journal</i> for June 2, 1752. He took as the motto for
the paper:</p>

<p>'O bone, ne te<br/>

Frustrere, insanis et tu';<br/>
</p>

<p>which he translates, 'My good friend, do not deceive thyself; for with
all thy charity thou also art a silly fellow.' 'Giving our money to
common beggars,' he describes as 'a kind of bounty that is a crime
against the public.' Fielding's <i>Works</i>, x. 77, ed. 1806. Johnson once
allowed (<i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton's <i>Collection</i>) that 'one might
give away £500 a year to those that importune in the streets, and not do
any good.' See also <i>post</i>, Oct. 10, 1779.</p>

<p>[347] He was once attacked, though whether by robbers is not made clear.
See <i>post</i>, under Feb. 7, 1775.</p>

<p>[348] Perhaps it was this class of people which is described in the
following passage:—'It was never against people of coarse life that his
contempt was expressed, while poverty of sentiment in men who considered
themselves to be company <i>for the parlour</i>, as he called it, was what he
would not bear.' Piozzi's <i>Anec</i>. 215.</p>

<p>[349] See <i>ante</i>, i. 320, for one such offer.</p>

<p>[350] See <i>ante</i>, i. 163, note 1, and <i>post</i>, March 30, 1781.</p>

<p>[351] Dr. T. Campbell, in his <i>Survey of the South of Ireland</i>, ed. 1777
(<i>post</i>, April 5, 1775), says:—'By one law of the penal code, if a
Papist have a horse worth fifty, or five hundred pounds, a Protestant
may become the purchaser upon paying him down five. By another of the
same code, a son may say to his father, "Sir, if you don't give me what
money I want, I'll turn <i>discoverer</i>, and in spite of you and my elder
brother too, on whom at marriage you settled your estate, I shall become
heir,"' p. 251. Father O'Leary, in his <i>Remarks on Wesley's Letter</i>,
published in 1780 (<i>post</i>, <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 15, 1773), says (p.
41):—'He has seen the venerable matron, after twenty-four years'
marriage, banished from the perjured husband's house, though it was
proved in open court that for six months before his marriage he went to
mass. But the law requires that he should be a year and a day of the
same religion.' Burke wrote in 1792: 'The Castle [the government in
Dublin] considers the out-lawry (or what at least I look on as such) of
the great mass of the people as an unalterable maxim in the government
of Ireland.' <i>Burke's Corres</i>., iii. 378. See <i>post</i>, ii. 130, and May
7, 1773, and Oct. 12, 1779.</p>

<p>[352] See post, just before Feb. 18, 1775.</p>

<p>[353] 'Of Sheridan's writings on elocution, Johnson said, they were a
continual renovation of hope, and an unvaried succession of
disappointments.' Johnson's <i>Works</i> (1787), xi. 197. See <i>post</i>, May
17, 1783.</p>

<p>[354] In 1753, Jonas Hanway published his <i>Travels to Persia</i>.</p>

<p>[355] 'Though his journey was completed in eight days he gave a relation
of it in two octavo volumes.' Hawkins's <i>Johnson</i>, p. 352. See
<i>ante</i>, i. 313.</p>

<p>[356] See <i>ante</i>, i. 68, and <i>post</i>, June 9, 1784, note, where he varies
the epithet, calling it 'the best piece of <i>parenetic</i> divinity.'</p>

<p>[357] '"I taught myself," Law tells us, "the high Dutch language, on
purpose to know the original words of the blessed Jacob."' Overton's
<i>Life of Law</i>, p. 181. Behmen, or Böhme, the mystic shoemaker of
Gorlitz, was born in 1575, and died in 1624. 'His books may not hold at
all honourable places in libraries; his name may be ridiculous. But he
<i>was</i> a generative thinker. What he knew he knew for himself. It was not
transmitted to him, but fought for.' F.D. Maurice's <i>Moral and Meta.
Phil</i>. ii. 325. Of Hudibras's squire, Ralph, it was said:</p>

<p>'He Anthroposophus, and Floud,<br/>

And Jacob Behmen understood.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Hudibras</i>, I. i. 541.</p>

<p>Wesley (<i>Journal</i>, i. 359) writes of Behmen's <i>Mysteriun Magnum</i>, 'I can
and must say thus much (and that with as full evidence as I can say two
and two make four) it is most sublime nonsense, inimitable bombast,
fustian not to be paralleled.'</p>

<p>[358] 'He heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to
utter,' 2 Corinthians, xii. 4.</p>

<p>[359] See <i>ante</i>, i. 458. In <i>Humphry Clinker</i>, in the Letter of June
11, the turnkey of Clerkenwell Prison thus speaks of a Methodist:—'I
don't care if the devil had him; here has been nothing but canting and
praying since the fellow entered the place. Rabbit him! the tap will be
ruined—we han't sold a cask of beer nor a dozen of wine, since he paid
his garnish—the gentlemen get drunk with nothing but your damned
religion.'</p>

<p>[360] 'John Wesley probably paid more for turnpikes than any other man
in England, for no other person travelled so much.' Southey's <i>Wesley</i>,
i. 407. 'He tells us himself, that he preached about 800 sermons in a
year.' <i>Ib</i> ii. 532. In one of his <i>Appeals to Men of Reason and
Religion</i>, he asks:—'Can you bear the summer sun to beat upon your
naked head? Can you suffer the wintry rain or wind, from whatever
quarter it blows? Are you able to stand in the open air, without any
covering or defence, when God casteth abroad his snow like wool, or
scattereth his hoar-frost like ashes? And yet these are some of the
smallest inconveniences which accompany field-preaching. For beyond all
these, are the contradiction of sinners, the scoffs both of the great
vulgar and the small; contempt and reproach of every kind—often more
than verbal affronts—stupid, brutal violence, sometimes to the hazard
of health, or limbs, or life. Brethren, do you envy us this honour?
What, I pray you, would buy you to be a field-preacher? Or what, think
you, could induce any man of common sense to continue therein one year,
unless he had a full conviction in himself that it was the will of God
concerning him?' Southey's <i>Wesley</i>, i. 405.</p>

<p>[361] Stockdale reported to Johnson, that Pope had told Lyttelton that
the reason why he had not translated Homer into blank verse was 'that he
could translate it more easily into rhyme. "Sir," replied Johnson, "when
the Pope said that, he knew that he lied."' Stockdale's <i>Memoirs</i>, ii.
44. In the <i>Life of Somervile</i>, Johnson says:—'If blank verse be not
tumid and gorgeous, it is crippled prose.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, viii. 95.
See <i>post</i> beginning of 1781.</p>

<p>[362] <i>Ephesians</i>, v. 20.</p>

<p>[363] In the original—'Yet all hope pleasure in what yet remain' See
<i>post</i> June 12, 1784.</p>

<p>[364] See <i>post</i> under Aug 29, 1783, and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i> Oct 14,
1773.</p>

<p>[365] 'The chief glory of every people arises from its authours.'
Johnson's <i>Works</i>, v 49.</p>

<p>[366] In a Discourse by Sir William Jones, addressed to the Asiatick
Society [in Calcutta], Feb. 24, 1785, is the following passage:—</p>

<p>'One of the most sagacious men in this age who continues, I hope, to
improve and adorn it, Samuel Johnson [he had been dead ten weeks],
remarked in my hearing, that if Newton had flourished in ancient Greece,
he would have been worshipped as a Divinity.' MALONE. Johnson, in <i>An
Account of an Attempt to ascertain the Longitude</i> (<i>Works</i>, v, 299),
makes the supposed author say:—'I have lived till I am able to produce
in my favour the testimony of time, the inflexible enemy of false
hypotheses; the only testimony which it becomes human understanding to
oppose to the authority of Newton.'</p>

<p>[367] Murphy (<i>Life</i>, p. 91) places the scene of such a conversation in
the house of the Bishop of Salisbury. 'Boscovitch,' he writes, 'had a
ready current flow of that flimsy phraseology with which a priest may
travel through Italy, Spain, and Germany. Johnson scorned what he called
colloquial barbarisms. It was his pride to speak his best. He went on,
after a little practice, with as much facility as if it was his native
tongue. One sentence this writer well remembers. Observing that
Fontenelle at first opposed the Newtonian philosophy, and embraced it
afterwards, his words were:—"Fontenellus, ni fallor, in extrema
senectute fuit transfuga ad castra Newtoniana."' See <i>post</i>, under Nov.
12, 1775. Boscovitch, the Jesuit astronomer, was a professor in the
University of Pavia. When Dr. Burney visited him, 'he complained very
much of the silence of the English astronomers, who answer none of his
letters.' Burney's <i>Tour in France and Italy</i>, p. 92.</p>

<p>[368] See <i>post</i>, in 1781, the <i>Life of Lyttelton</i>.</p>

<p>[369] The first of Macpherson's forgeries was <i>Fragments of Ancient
Poetry collected in the Highlands</i>. Edinburgh, 1760. In 1762, he
published in London, <i>The Works of Ossian, the son of Fingal</i>, 2 vols.
Vol. i. contained <i>Fingal, an Ancient Epic Poem</i>, in six Books. See
<i>post</i>, Jan 1775.</p>

<p>[370] Horace, <i>Ars Poetica</i>, l. 41.</p>

<p>[371] Perhaps Johnson had some ill-will towards attorneys, such as he
had towards excisemen (<i>ante</i>, i. 36, note 5 and 294). In <i>London</i>,
which was published in May, 1738, he couples them with street robbers:</p>

<p>'Their ambush here relentless ruffians lay,<br/>

And here the fell attorney prowls for prey.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Works</i>, i. 1. In a paper in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for following June (p.
287), written, I have little doubt, by him, the profession is this
savagely attacked:—'Our ancestors, in ancient times, had some regard to
the moral character of the person sent to represent them in their
national assemblies, and would have shewn some degree of resentment or
indignation, had their votes been asked for murderer, an adulterer, a
know oppressor, an hireling evidence, an attorney, a gamester, or pimp.'
In the <i>Life of Blackmere</i> (<i>Works</i>, viii. 36) he has a sly hit at the
profession. 'Sir Richard Blackmore was the son of Robert Blackmore,
styled by Wood gentleman, and supposed to have been an attorney.' We may
compare Goldsmith's lines in <i>Retaliation</i>:—'Then what was his failing?
come tell it, and burn ye,—</p>

<p>'He was, could he help it? a special attorney.'</p>

<p>See also <i>post</i>, under June 16, 1784.</p>

<p>[372] See <i>ante</i>, i. Appendix F.</p>

<p>[373] Dr. Maxwell is perhaps here quoting the <i>Idler</i>, No. 69, where
Johnson, speaking of <i>Bioethics on the Confronts of Philosophy</i>, calls
it 'the book which seems to have been the favourite of the middle ages.'</p>

<p>[374] Yet it is Murphy's tragedy of <i>Zenobia</i> that Mrs. Piozzi writes
(<i>Anec</i>. p. 280):—'A gentleman carried Dr. Johnson his tragedy, which
because he loved the author, he took, and it lay about our rooms some
time. "Which answer did you give your friend, Sir?" said I, after the
book had been called for. "I told him," replied he, "that there was too
<i>Tig and Terry</i> in it." Seeing me laugh most violently, "Why, what
would'st have, child?" said he. "I looked at nothing but the <i>dramatis</i>
[<i>personae</i>], and there was <i>Tigranes</i> and <i>Tiridates</i>, or <i>Teribaeus</i>,
or such stuff. A man can tell but what he knows, and I never got any
further than the <i>first</i> pages."' In <i>Zenobia</i> two and Tigranes.</p>

<p>[375] Hume was one who had this idle dream. Shortly before his death one
of his friends wrote:—'He still maintains that the national debt must
be the ruin of Britain; and laments that the two most civilised nations,
the English and French, should be on the decline; and the barbarians,
the Goths and Vandals of Germany and Russia, should be rising in power
and renown.' J. H. Burton's <i>Hume</i>, ii. 497.</p>

<p>[376] Hannah More was with Dr. Kennicott at his death. 'Thus closed a
life,' she wrote (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 289), 'the last thirty years of which
were honourably spent in collating the Hebrew Scriptures.' See also
Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 16, 1773.</p>

<p>[377] Johnson (<i>Works</i>, viii. 467) says that Mallet, in return for what
he wrote against Byng, 'had a considerable pension bestowed upon him,
which he retained to his death.' See <i>ante</i>, i. 268.</p>

<p>[378] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 76.</p>

<p>[379] 'It is dangerous for a man and woman to suspend their fate upon
each other at a time when opinions are fixed, and habits are
established; when friendships have been contracted on both sides; when
life has been planned into method, and the mind has long enjoyed the
contemplation of its own prospects.' <i>Rasselas</i>, ch. xxix.</p>

<p>[380] Malone records that 'Cooper was round and fat. Dr. Warton, one
day, when dining with Johnson, urged in his favour that he was, at
least, very well informed, and a good scholar. "Yes," said Johnson, "it
cannot be denied that he has good materials for playing the fool, and he
makes abundant use of them."' Prior's <i>Malone</i>, p. 428. See <i>post</i>,
Sept. 15, 1777, note.</p>

<p>[381] See <i>post</i>, Sept 21, 1777, and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 22,
1773.</p>

<p>[382] But see <i>ante</i>, i. 299, where Johnson owned that his happier days
had come last.</p>

<p>[383]</p>

<p>'In youth alone unhappy mortals live,<br/>

But ah! the mighty bliss is fugitive;<br/>

Discolour'd sickness, anxious labours come,<br/>

And age, and death's inexorable doom.'<br/>
</p>

<p>DRYDEN. Virgil, <i>Georgics</i>, iii. 66. In the first edition Dr. Maxwell's
<i>Collectanea</i> ended here. What follows was given in the second edition
in <i>Additions received after the second edition was printed</i>, i. v.</p>

<p>[384] To Glaucus. Clarke's translation is:—'Ut semper fortissime rem
gererem, et superior virtute essem aliis.' <i>Iliad</i>, vi. 208. Cowper's
version is:—</p>

<p>'That I should outstrip always all mankind In worth and valour.'</p>

<p>[385] Maxwell calls him his old master, because Sharpe was Master of the
Temple when Maxwell was assistant preacher. CROKER.</p>

<p>[386] Dr. T. Campbell, in his <i>Survey of the South of Ireland</i>, p. 185,
writes: 'In England the meanest cottager is better fed, better lodged,
and better dressed than the most opulent farmers here.' See post,
Oct. 19, 1779.</p>

<p>[387] In the vice-royalty of the Duke of Bedford, which began in Dec.
1756, 'in order to encourage tillage a law was passed granting bounties
on the land carriage of corn and flour to the metropolis.' Lecky's
<i>Hist. of Eng</i>. ii. 435. In 1773-4 a law was passed granting bounties
upon the export of Irish corn to foreign countries. <i>Ib</i> iv. 415.</p>

<p>[388] See <i>ante</i>, i. 434.</p>

<p>[389] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 121. Lord Kames, in his <i>Sketches of the History
of Man</i>, published in 1774, says:—'In Ireland to this day goods
exported are loaded with a high duty, without even distinguishing made
work from raw materials; corn, for example, fish, butter, horned cattle,
leather, &amp;c. And, that nothing may escape, all goods exported that are
not contained in the book of rates, pay five per cent, <i>ad valorem</i>.'
ii. 413. These export duties were selfishly levied in what was supposed
to be the interest of England.</p>

<p>[390] 'At this time [1756] appeared Brown's <i>Estimate</i>, a book now
remembered only by the allusions in Cowper's <i>Table Talk</i> [Cowper's
<i>Poems</i>, ed. 1786, i. 20] and in Burke's <i>Letters on a Regicide Peace</i>
[Payne's <i>Burke</i>, p. 9]. It was universally read, admired, and believed.
The author fully convinced his readers that they were a race of cowards
and scoundrels; that nothing could save them; that they were on the
point of being enslaved by their enemies, and that they richly deserved
their fate.' Macaulay's <i>Essays</i>, ii. 183. Dr. J.H. Burton says:—'Dr.
Brown's book is said to have run to a seventh edition in a few months.
It is rather singular that the edition marked as the seventh has
precisely the same matter in each page, and the same number of pages as
the first.' <i>Life of Hume</i>, ii. 23. Brown wrote two tragedies,
<i>Barbarossa</i> and <i>Athelstan</i>, both of which Garrick brought out at Drury
Lane. In <i>Barbarossa</i> Johnson observed 'that there were two
improprieties; in the first place, the use of a bell is unknown to the
Mahometans; and secondly, Otway had tolled a bell before Dr. Brown, and
we are not to be made April fools twice by the same trick.' Murphy's
<i>Garrick</i>, p. 173. Brown's vanity is shown in a letter to Garrick
(<i>Garrick Corres</i>. i. 220) written on Jan. 19, 1766, in which he talks
of going to St. Petersburg, and drawing up a System of Legislation for
the Russian Empire. In the following September, in a fit of madness, he
made away with himself.</p>

<p>[391] See <i>post</i>, May 8, 1781.</p>

<p>[392] Horace Walpole, writing in May, 1764, says:—'The Earl of
Northumberland returned from Ireland, where his profusion and
ostentation had been so great that it seemed to lay a dangerous
precedent for succeeding governors.' <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George
III</i>, i. 417. He was created Duke in 1766. For some pleasant anecdotes
about this nobleman and Goldsmith, see Goldsmith's <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 66,
and Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 379, and ii. 227.</p>

<p>[393] Johnson thus writes of him (<i>Works</i>, viii. 207):—'The Archbishop
of Dublin gave him at first some disturbance in the exercise of his
jurisdiction; but it was soon discovered that between prudence and
integrity he was seldom in the wrong; and that, when he was right, his
spirit did not easily yield to opposition.' He adds: 'He delivered
Ireland from plunder and oppression, and showed that wit confederated
with truth had such force as authority was unable to resist. He said
truly of himself that Ireland "was his debtor." It was from the time
when he first began to patronise the Irish, that they may date their
riches and prosperity.' <i>Ib</i> p. 319. Pope, in his <i>Imitations of
Horace</i>, II. i. 221, says:—</p>

<p>'Let Ireland tell how wit upheld her cause,<br/>

Her trade supported, and supplied her laws;<br/>

And leave on Swift this grateful verse engraved,<br/>

"The rights a Court attacked, a poet saved."'<br/>
</p>

<p>[394] These lines have been discovered by the author's second son in the
<i>London Magazine</i> for July 1732, where they form part of a poem on
<i>Retirement</i>, copied, with some slight variations, from one of Walsh's
smaller poems, entitled <i>The Retirement</i>. They exhibit another proof
that Johnson retained in his memory fragments of neglected poetry. In
quoting verses of that description, he appears by a slight variation to
have sometimes given them a moral turn, and to have dexterously adapted
them to his own sentiments, where the original had a very different
tendency. In 1782, when he was at Brighthelmstone, he repeated to Mr.
Metcalfe, some verses, as very characteristic of a celebrated historian
[Gibbon]. They are found among some anonymous poems appended to the
second volume of a collection frequently printed by Lintot, under the
title of <i>Pope's Miscellanies</i>:—</p>

<p>'See how the wand'ring Danube flows,<br/>

   Realms and religions parting;<br/>

A friend to all true Christian foes,<br/>

   To Peter, Jack, and Martin.<br/>

Now Protestant, and Papist now,<br/>

   Not constant long to either,<br/>

At length an infidel does grow,<br/>

  And ends his journey neither.<br/>

Thus many a youth I've known set out,<br/>

   Half Protestant, half Papist,<br/>

And rambling long the world about,<br/>

   Turn infidel or atheist.'<br/>
</p>

<p>MALONE. See <i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton's <i>Collection</i>, and Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i> Aug. 27, and Oct. 28, 1773.</p>

<p>[395] Juvenal, <i>Sat</i>. iii. 1. 2.</p>

<p>'Yet still my calmer thoughts his choice commend.'</p>

<p>Johnson's <i>London</i>, 1. 3.</p>

<p>[396] It was published without the authors name.</p>

<p>[397] 'What have we acquired? What but … an island thrown aside from
human use; … an island which not the southern savages have dignified
with habitation.' <i>Works</i>, vi. 198.</p>

<p>[398] 'It is wonderful with what coolness and indifference the greater
part of mankind see war commenced. Those that hear of it at a distance,
or read of it in books, but have never presented its evils to their
minds, consider it as little more than a splendid game, a proclamation,
an army, a battle, and a triumph. Some, indeed, must perish in the most
successful field, but they die upon the bed of honour, "resign their
lives, amidst the joys of conquest, and, filled with England's glory,
smile in death." The life of a modern soldier is ill-represented by
heroic fiction. War has means of destruction more formidable than the
cannon and the sword.</p>

<p>Of the thousands and ten thousands that perished in our late contests
with France and Spain, a very small part ever felt the stroke of an
enemy; the rest languished in tents and ships, amidst damps and
putrefaction; pale, torpid, spiritless, and helpless; gasping and
groaning, unpitied among men made obdurate by long continuance of
hopeless misery; and were at last whelmed in pits, or heaved into the
ocean, without notice and without remembrance. By incommodious
encampments and unwholesome stations, where courage is useless, and
enterprise impracticable, fleets are silently dispeopled, and armies
sluggishly melted away.' <i>Works</i>, vi. 199.</p>

<p>[399] Johnson wrote of the Earl of Chatham:—'This surely is a
sufficient answer to the feudal gabble of a man who is every day
lessening that splendour of character which once illuminated the
kingdom, then dazzled, and afterwards inflamed it; and for whom it will
be happy if the nation shall at last dismiss him to nameless obscurity,
with that equipoise of blame and praise which Corneille allows to
Richelieu.' <i>Works</i>, vi. 197.</p>

<p>[400] <i>Ephesians</i>, vi. 12. Johnson (<i>Works</i>, vi. 198) calls Junius 'one
of the few writers of his despicable faction whose name does not
disgrace the page of an opponent.' But he thus ends his attack;—'What,
says Pope, must be the priest where a monkey is the god? What must be
the drudge of a party of which the heads are Wilkes and Crosby,
Sawbridge and Townsend?' <i>Ib</i> p. 206.</p>

<p>[401] This softening was made in the later copies of the <i>first</i>
edition. A second change seems to have been made. In the text, as given
in Murphy's edition (1796, viii. 137), the last line of the passage
stands:—'If he was sometimes wrong, he was often right.' Horace Walpole
describes Grenville's 'plodding, methodic genius, which made him take
the spirit of detail for ability.' <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George III</i>,
i. 36. For the fine character that Burke drew of him see Payne's
<i>Burke</i>, i. 122. There is, I think, a hit at Lord Bute's Chancellor of
the Exchequer, Sir F. Dashwood (Lord Le Despencer), who was described as
'a man to whom a sum of five figures was an impenetrable secret.'
Walpole's <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George III</i>, i. 172, note. He himself
said, 'People will point at me, and cry, "there goes the worst
Chancellor of the Exchequer that ever appeared."' <i>Ib</i> p. 250.</p>

<p>[402] Boswell, I suspect, quoted this passage from hearsay, for
originally it stood:—'If he could have got the money, he could have
counted it' (p. 68). In the British Museum there are copies of the first
edition both <i>softened</i> and <i>unsoftened</i>.</p>

<p>[403] <i>Thoughts on the late Transactions respecting Falkland's Islands</i>.
BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[404] By comparing the first with the subsequent editions, this curious
circumstance of ministerial authorship may be discovered. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[405] <i>Navigation</i> was the common term for canals, which at that time
were getting rapidly made. A writer in <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th, xi. 64,
shows that Langton, as payment of a loan, undertook to pay Johnson's
servant, Frank, an annuity for life, secured on profits from the
<i>navigation</i> of the River Wey in Surrey.</p>

<p>[406] It was, Mr. Chalmers told me, a saying about that time, 'Married a
Countess Dowager of Rothes!' 'Why, everybody marries a Countess Dowager
of Rothes!' And there were in fact, about 1772, three ladies of that
name married to second husbands. CROKER. Mr. Langton married one of
these ladies.</p>

<p>[407] <i>The Hermit of Warkworth: A Ballad in three cantos</i>. T. Davis, 25.
6d. Cradock (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 207) quotes Johnson's parody on a stanza in
<i>The Hermit</i>:</p>

<p>'I put my hat upon my head,<br/>

 And walked into the Strand,<br/>

 And there I met another man<br/>

 With his hat in his hand.'<br/>
</p>

<p>'Mr. Garrick,' he continues, 'asked me whether I had seen Johnson's
criticism on the <i>Hermit</i>. "It is already," said he, "over half
the town."'</p>

<p>[408] '"I am told," says a letter-writer of the day, "that Dr. Goldsmith
now generally lives with his countryman, Lord Clare, who has lost his
only son, Colonel Nugent."' Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 228. '<i>The Haunch
of Venison</i> was written this year (1771), and appears to have been
written for Lord Clare alone; nor was it until two years after the
writer's death that it obtained a wider audience than his immediate
circle of friends.' <i>Ib</i> p. 230. See <i>post</i>, April 17, 1778.</p>

<p>[409] Gibbon (<i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 222) mentions Mr. Strahan:—'I agreed
upon easy terms with Mr. Thomas Cadell, a respectable bookseller, and
Mr. William Strahan, an eminent printer, and they undertook the care and
risk of the publication [of the <i>Decline and Fall</i>], which derived more
credit from the name of the shop than from that of the author…. So
moderate were our hopes, that the original impression had been stinted
to five hundred, till the number was doubled by the prophetic taste of
Mr. Strahan.' Hume, by his will, left to Strahan's care all his
manuscripts, 'trusting,' he says, 'to the friendship that has long
subsisted between us for his careful and faithful execution of my
intentions.' J. H. Burton's <i>Hume</i>, ii. 494. See <i>ib</i>. p. 512, for a
letter written to Hume on his death-bed by Strahan.</p>

<p>[410] Dr. Franklin, writing of the year 1773, says (<i>Memoirs</i>, i.
398):—'An acquaintance (Mr. Strahan, M.P.) calling on me, after having
just been at the Treasury, showed me what he styled <i>a pretty thing</i>,
for a friend of his; it was an order for £150, payable to Dr. Johnson,
said to be one half of his yearly pension.'</p>

<p>[411] See <i>post</i>, July 27, 1778.</p>

<p>[412] Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 513) says that Mr. Thrale made the same
attempt. 'He had two meetings with the ministry, who at first seemed
inclined to find Johnson a seat.' 'Lord Stowell told me,' says Mr.
Croker, 'that it was understood amongst Johnson's friends that Lord
North was afraid that Johnson's help (as he himself said of Lord
Chesterfield's) might have been sometimes <i>embarrassing</i>. "He perhaps
thought, and not unreasonably," added Lord Stowell, "that, like the
elephant in the battle, he was quite as likely to trample down his
friends as his foes."' Lord Stowell referred to Johnson's letter to
Chesterfield (<i>ante</i>, i. 262), in which he describes a patron as 'one
who encumbers a man with help.'</p>

<p>[413] Boswell married his cousin Margaret Montgomerie on Nov. 25, 1769.
On the same day his father married for the second time. <i>Scots Mag</i>. for
1769, p. 615. Boswell, in his <i>Letter to the People of Scotland</i> (p.
55), published in 1785, describes his wife as 'a true <i>Montgomerie</i>,
whom I esteem, whom I love, after fifteen years, as on the day when she
gave me her hand.' See his <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 14, 1773.</p>

<p>[414]</p>

<p>'Musis amicus, tristitiam et metus<br/>

Tradam, &amp;c.<br/>
</p>

<p>While in the Muse's friendship blest,<br/>

Nor fear, nor grief, shall break my rest;<br/>

Bear them, ye vagrant winds, away,<br/>

And drown them in the Cretan Sea.'<br/>
</p>

<p>FRANCIS. Horace, <i>Odes</i>, i. 26. I.</p>

<p>[415] Horace. <i>Odes</i>, i. 22. 5.</p>

<p>[416] Lord Elibank wrote to Boswell two years later:—'Old as I am, I
shall be glad to go five hundred miles to enjoy a day of Mr. Johnson's
company.' Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i> under date of Sept. 12, 1773. See <i>ib</i>.
Nov. 10, and <i>post</i>, April 5, 1776.</p>

<p>[417] Goldsmith wrote to Langton on Sept. 7, 1771:—'Johnson has been
down upon a visit to a country parson, Doctor Taylor, and is returned to
his old haunts at Mrs. Thrale's.' Goldsmith's <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 93.</p>

<p>[418] While Miss Burney was examining a likeness of Johnson, 'he no
sooner discerned it than he began see-sawing for a moment or two in
silence; and then, with a ludicrous half-laugh, peeping over her
shoulder, he called out:—"Ah, ha! Sam Johnson! I see thee!—and an ugly
dog thou art!"' <i>Memoirs of Dr. Burney</i>, ii. 180. In another passage (p.
197), after describing 'the kindness that irradiated his austere and
studious features into the most pleased and pleasing benignity,' as he
welcomed her and her father to his house, she adds that a lady who was
present often exclaimed, 'Why did not Sir Joshua Reynolds paint Dr.
Johnson when he was speaking to Dr. Burney or to you?'</p>

<p>[419] 'Johnson,' wrote Beattie from London on Sept. 8 of this year, 'has
been greatly misrepresented. I have passed several entire days with him,
and found him extremely agreeable.' Beattie's <i>Life</i>, ed. 1824, p. 120.</p>

<p>[420] He was preparing the fourth edition, See _post, March 23, 1772.</p>

<p>[421] 'Sept. 18, 1771, 9 at night. I am now come to my sixty-third year.
For the last year I have been slowly recovering both from the violence
of my last illness, and, I think, from the general disease of my life:
… some advances I hope have been made towards regularity. I have
missed church since Easter only two Sundays…. But indolence and
indifference has [sic] been neither conquered nor opposed.' <i>Pr. and
Med</i>. p. 104.</p>

<p>[422] 'Let us search and try our ways.' <i>Lamentations</i> iii. 40.</p>

<p>[423] <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 101 [105]. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[424] Boswell forgets the fourth edition of his <i>Dictionary</i>. Johnson,
in Aug. 1771 (<i>ante</i>, p. 142), wrote to Langton:—'I am engaging in a
very great work, the revision of my <i>Dictionary</i>.' In <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p.
123, at Easter, 1773, as he 'reviews the last year,' he records:—'Of
the spring and summer I remember that I was able in those seasons to
examine and improve my <i>Dictionary</i>, and was seldom withheld from the
work but by my own unwillingness.'</p>

<p>[425] Thus translated by a friend:—</p>

<p>'In fame scarce second to the nurse of Jove,<br/>

This Goat, who twice the world had traversed round,<br/>

Deserving both her masters care and love,<br/>

Ease and perpetual pasture now has found.'<br/>
</p>

<h5>BOSWELL.</h5>

<p>[426] Cockburn (<i>Life of Jeffrey</i>, i. 4) says that the High School of
Edinburgh, in 1781, 'was cursed by two under master, whose atrocities
young men cannot be made to believe, but old men cannot forget, and the
criminal law would not now endure.'</p>

<p>[427] Mr. Langton married the Countess Dowager of Rothes. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[428] From school. See <i>ante</i>, ii. 62.</p>

<p>[429] See <i>ante</i>, i. 44.</p>

<p>[430] Johnson used to say that schoolmasters were worse than the
Egyptian task-masters of old. 'No boy,' says he, 'is sure any day he
goes to school to escape a whipping. How can the schoolmaster tell what
the boy has really forgotten, and what he has neglected to learn?'
Johnson's <i>Works</i> (1787), xi. 209. 'I rejoice,' writes J. S. Mill
(<i>Auto</i>. p. 53), 'in the decline of the old, brutal, and tyrannical
system of teaching, which, however, did succeed in enforcing habits of
application; but the new, as it seems to me, is training up a race of
men who be incapable of doing anything which is disagreeable to them.'</p>

<p>[431] See <i>ante</i>, i. 373.</p>

<p>[432] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 74.</p>

<p>[433] The ship in which Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander were to have sailed
was the Endeavour. It was, they said, unfit for the voyage. The
Admiralty altered it in such a way as to render it top-heavy. It was
nearly overset on going down the river. Then it was rendered safe by
restoring it to its former condition. When the explorers raised their
former objections, they were told to take it or none. <i>Ann. Reg</i>. xv.
108. See also Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 18, 1773.</p>

<p>[434] I suspect that <i>Raleigh</i> is here an error of Mr. Boswell's pen for
<i>Drake</i>. CROKER. Johnson had written Drake's <i>Life</i>, and therefore must
have had it well in mind that it was Drake who went round the world.</p>

<p>[435] <i>Romeo and Juliet</i>, act v. sc. 1.</p>

<h5>[436] 'TO JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</h5>

<p>'<i>Edinburgh</i>, May 3, 1792.</p>

<h5>'MY DEAR SIR,</h5>

<p>'As I suppose your great work will soon be reprinted, I beg leave to
trouble you with a remark on a passage of it, in which I am a little
misrepresented. Be not alarmed; the misrepresentation is not imputable
to you. Not having the book at hand, I cannot specify the page, but I
suppose you will easily find it. Dr. Johnson says, speaking of Mrs.
Thrale's family, "Dr. Beattie <i>sunk upon us</i> that he was married, or
words to that purpose." I am not sure that I understand <i>sunk upon us</i>,
which is a very uncommon phrase, but it seems to me to imply, (and
others, I find, have understood it in the same sense,) <i>studiously
concealed from us his being married</i>. Now, Sir, this was by no means the
case. I could have no motive to conceal a circumstance, of which I never
was nor can be ashamed; and of which Dr. Johnson seemed to think, when
he afterwards became acquainted with Mrs. Beattie, that I had, as was
true, reason to be proud. So far was I from concealing her, that my wife
had at that time almost as numerous an acquaintance in London as I had
myself; and was, not very long after, kindly invited and elegantly
entertained at Streatham by Mr. and Mrs. Thrale.</p>

<p>'My request, therefore, is, that you would rectify this matter in your
new edition. You are at liberty to make what use you please of
this letter.</p>

<p>'My best wishes ever attend you and your family. Believe me to be, with
the utmost regard and esteem, dear Sir,</p>

<p>'Your obliged and affectionate humble servant, J. BEATTIE.'</p>

<p>I have, from my respect for my friend Dr. Beattie, and regard to his
extreme sensibility, inserted the foregoing letter, though I cannot but
wonder at his considering as any imputation a phrase commonly used among
the best friends. BOSWELL. Mr. Croker says there was a cause for the
'extreme sensibility.' 'Dr. Beattie was conscious that there was
something that might give a colour to such an imputation. It became
known, shortly after the date of this letter, that the mind of Mrs.
Beattie had become deranged.' Beattie would have found in Johnson's
<i>Dictionary</i> an explanation of <i>sunk upon us</i>—'<i>To sink. To suppress;
to conceal</i>. "If sent with ready money to buy anything, and you happen
to be out of pocket, <i>sink</i> the money and take up the goods on
account."' Swift's <i>Rules to Servants</i>, <i>Works</i>, viii. 256.</p>

<p>[437] See <i>ante</i>, i 450.</p>

<p>[438] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 10.</p>

<p>[439] See <i>Post</i>, April 15, 1778, note, and June 12, 1784.</p>

<p>[440] See ante, i. 405.</p>

<p>[441] <i>St. John</i>, xv. 24</p>

<p>[442] See note, p. 51 of this volume. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[443] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 105.</p>

<p>[444] The petition was presented on Feb. 6 of this year. By a majority
thrown of 217 to 71 leave was refused for it to be brought up. <i>Parl.
Hist</i>. xvii. 245-297. Gibbon, in a letter dated Feb. 8, 1772 (<i>Misc.
Works</i>, ii. 74), congratulates Mr. Holroyd 'on the late victory of our
dear mamma, the Church of England. She had, last Thursday, 71 rebellious
sons, who pretended to set aside her will on account of insanity; but
217 worthy champions, headed by Lord North, Burke, and Charles Fox,
though they allowed the thirty-nine clauses of her testament were absurd
and unreasonable, supported the validity of it with infinite humour. By
the by, Charles Fox prepared himself for that holy war by passing
twenty-two hours in the pious exercise of hazard; his devotion cost him
only about £500 per hour—in all, £11,000.' See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>,
Aug. 19, 1773.</p>

<p>[445] 'Lord George Germayne,' writes Horace Walpole, 'said that he
wondered the House did not take some steps on this subject with regard
to the Universities, where boys were made to subscribe to the Articles
without reading them—a scandalous abuse.' <i>Journal of the Reign of
George III</i>, i. 11.</p>

<p>[446] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 104.</p>

<p>[447] Burke had thus answered Boswell's proposal:—'What is that
Scripture to which they are content to subscribe? The Bible is a vast
collection of different treatises; a man who holds the divine authority
of one may consider the other as merely human. Therefore, to ascertain
Scripture you must have one Article more, and you must define what that
Scripture is which you mean to teach.' <i>Parl. Hist</i>. xvii. 284.</p>

<p>[448] Dr. Nowell (<i>post</i>, June 11, 1784) had this year preached the fast
sermon before the House of Commons on Jan. 30, the anniversary of the
execution of Charles I, and received the usual vote of thanks. <i>Parl.
Hist. xvii</i>. 245. On Feb. 25 the entry of the vote was, without a
division, ordered to be expunged. On the publication of the sermon it
had been seen that Nowell had asserted that George III was endued with
the same virtues as Charles I, and that the members of the House were
the descendants of those who had opposed that King. <i>Ib</i> p. 313, and
<i>Ann. Reg</i>. xv. 79. On March 2, Mr. Montague moved for leave to bring in
a bill to abolish the fast, but it was refused by 125 to 97. <i>Parl.
Hist</i>. xvii. 319. The fast was abolished in 1859—thirteen years within
the century that Johnson was ready to allow it. 'It is remarkable,'
writes Horace Walpole, 'that George III had never from the beginning of
his reign gone to church on the 30th of January, whereas George II
always did.' <i>Journal of the Reign of George III</i>, i. 41.</p>

<p>[449] This passage puzzled Mr. Croker and Mr. Lockhart. The following
extract from the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for Feb. 1772, p. 92, throws light on
Johnson's meaning:—'This, say the opposers of the Bill, is putting it
in the King's power to change the order of succession, as he may for
ever prevent, if he is so minded, the elder branches of the family from
marrying, and therefore may establish the succession in the younger. Be
this as it may, is it not, in fact, converting the holy institution of
marriage into a mere state contract?' See also the Protest of fourteen
of the peers in <i>Parl. Hist</i>. xvii. 391, and <i>post</i>, April 15, 1773.
Horace Walpole ends his account of the Marriage Bill by saying:—'Thus
within three weeks were the Thirty-nine Articles affirmed and the New
Testament deserted.' <i>Journal of the Reign of George III</i>, i. 37. How
carelessly this Act was drawn was shown by Lord Eldon, when
Attorney-General, in the case of the marriage of the Duke of Sussex to
Lady Augusta Murray. 'Lord Thurlow said to me angrily at the Privy
Council, "Sir, why have you not prosecuted under the Act of Parliament
all the parties concerned in this abominable marriage?" To which I
answered, "That it was a very difficult business to prosecute—that the
Act had been drawn by Lord Mansfield and <i>Mr. Attorney-General Thurlow</i>,
and Mr. Solicitor-General Wedderburne, and unluckily they had made all
parties present at the marriage guilty of felony; and as nobody could
prove the marriage except a person who had been present at it, there
could be no prosecution, because nobody present could be compelled to be
a witness." This put an end to the matter.' Twiss's <i>Eldon</i>, i. 234.</p>

<p>[450] See <i>post</i>, May 9, 1773, and May 13, 1778.</p>

<p>[451] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 25, 1773, where Johnson, discussing
the same question, says:—'There is generally a <i>scoundrelism</i> about
a low man.'</p>

<p>[452] Mackintosh told Mr. Croker that this friend was Mr. Cullen,
afterwards a judge by the name of Lord Cullen. In <i>Boswelliana</i> (pp.
250-2), Boswell mentions him thrice, and always as 'Cullen the mimick.'
His manner, he says, was wretched, and his physiognomy worse than
Wilkes's. Dr. A. Carlyle (<i>Auto</i>. p. 268) says that 'Cullen possessed
the talent of mimicry beyond all mankind; for his was not merely an
exact imitation of voice and manner of speaking, but a perfect
exhibition of every man's manner of thinking on every subject.' Carlyle
mentions two striking instances of this.</p>

<p>[453] See <i>post</i>, May 15, 1776.</p>

<p>[454] 'The prince of Dublin printers,' as Swift called him. Swift's
<i>Works</i> (1803), xviii. 288. He was taken off by Foote under the name of
Peter Paragraph, in <i>The Orators</i>, the piece in which he had meant to
take off Johnson (<i>ante</i>, ii. 95). 'Faulkner consoled himself (pending
his prosecution of the libeller) by printing the libel, and selling it
most extensively.' Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 287. See Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 29.</p>

<p>[455] Faulkner had lost one of his legs. 'When Foote had his accident
(<i>ante</i>, ii. 95), "Now I shall take off old Faulkner indeed to the
life," was the first remark he made when what he had to suffer was
announced to him.' Forster's <i>Essays</i>, ii. 400.</p>

<p>[456] A writer in the <i>Monthly Review</i>, lxxvi. 374 (no doubt Murphy),
says:—'A large number of friends such as Johnson, Mr. Burke, and Mr.
Murphy dined at Garrick's at Christmas, 1760. Foote was then in Dublin.
It was said at table that he had been horse-whipped by an apothecary for
taking him off upon the stage. "But I wonder," said Garrick, "that any
man would show so much resentment to Foote; nobody ever thought it worth
his while to quarrel with him in London." "And I am glad," said Johnson,
"to find that the man is rising in the world." The anecdote was
afterwards told to Foote, who in return gave out that he would in a
short time produce the Caliban of literature on the stage. Being
informed of this design, Johnson sent word to Foote, that, the theatre
being intended for the reformation of vice, he would go from the boxes
on the stage, and correct him before the audience, Foote abandoned the
design. No ill-will ensued.'</p>

<p>[457] See <i>post</i>, May 15, 1776, where Johnson says:—'I turned Boswell
loose at Lichfield, my native city, that he might see for once real
<i>civility</i>.</p>

<p>[458] In my list of Boswell's projected works (<i>ante</i>, i. 225, note 2) I
have omitted this.</p>

<p>[459] See <i>post</i>, April 7, 1775.</p>

<p>[460] Boswell visited Ireland in the summer of 1760. Prior's
<i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 450.</p>

<p>[461] Puffendorf states that 'tutors and schoolmasters have a right to
the moderate use of gentle discipline over their pupils'—viii. 3-10;
adding, rather superfluously, Grotius's <i>caveat</i>, that 'it shall not
extend to a power of death.' CROKER.</p>

<p>[462] The brother of Sir J. Macdonald, mentioned <i>ante</i>, i. 449. Johnson
visited him in the Isle of Skye. 'He had been very well pleased with him
in London, but he was dissatisfied at hearing heavy complaints of rents
racked, and the people driven to emigration.' Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>,
Sept. 2, 1773. He reproached him also with meanness as a host.</p>

<p>[463] Lord Campbell (<i>Lives of the Chancellors</i>, v. 449) points out that
this conversation followed close on the appointment of 'the incompetent
Bathurst' as Chancellor. 'Such a conversation,' he adds, 'would not have
occurred during the chancellorship of Lord Hardwicke or Lord Somers.'</p>

<p>[464]</p>

<p>'But if at first he minds his hits,<br/>

 And drinks champagne among the wits,' &amp;c.<br/>
</p>

<p>Prior's <i>Chameleon</i>, 1. 39.</p>

<p>[465] 'Plain truth, <i>dear Murray</i>, needs no flowers of speech.' Pope
thus addresses him in Epistle vi. Book i. of his <i>Imitations of Horace</i>,
which he dedicated to him.</p>

<p>[466] See <i>ante</i>, 386.</p>

<p>[467] See <i>post</i>, March 23, 1776.</p>

<p>[468] Afterwards Lord Ashburton. Described by Johnson (<i>post</i>, July 22,
1777), as 'Mr. Dunning, the great lawyer.'</p>

<p>[469] 'Having cleared his tongue from his native pronunciation, so as to
be no longer distinguished as a Scot, he seems inclined to disencumber
himself from all adherences of his original, and took upon him to change
his name from Scotch <i>Malloch</i> to English <i>Mallet</i>, without any
imaginable reason of preference which the eye or ear can discover. What
other proofs he gave of disrespect to his native country I know not, but
it was remarked of him that he was the only Scot whom Scotchmen did not
commend.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, viii. 464. See <i>ante</i>, i. 268, and <i>post</i>,
April 28, 1783.</p>

<p>[470] Mr. Love was, so far as is known, the first who advised Boswell to
keep a journal. When Boswell was but eighteen, writing of a journey he
had taken, he says: 'I kept an exact journal, at the particular desire
of my friend, Mr. Love, and sent it to him in sheets every post.'
<i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 8.</p>

<p>[471] 'That's villainous, and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool
that uses it.' <i>Hamlet</i>, iii. 2.</p>

<p>[472] Jeffrey wrote from Oxford, where he spent nine months in
1791-2:—'The only part of a Scotchman I mean to abandon is the
language, and language is all I expect to learn in England.' (Cockburn's
<i>Jeffrey</i>, i. 46). His biographer says:—'He certainly succeeded in the
abandonment of his habitual Scotch. The change was so sudden and so
complete, that it excited the surprise of his friends, and furnished
others with ridicule for many years…. The result, on the whole, was
exactly as described by Lord Holland, who said that though Jeffrey "had
lost the broad Scotch at Oxford, he had only gained the narrow
English."' Cockburn, in forgetfulness of Mallet's case, says that 'the
acquisition of a pure English accent by a full-grown Scotchman is
fortunately impossible.'</p>

<p>[473] Henry Dundas, afterwards Viscount Melville. See <i>post</i>, under Nov.
29, 1777. Boswell wrote to Temple on May 22, 1775:—'Harry Dundas is
going to be made King's Advocate—Lord Advocate at thirty-three! I
cannot help being angry and somewhat fretful at this; he has, to be
sure, strong parts, but he is a coarse, unlettered, unfanciful dog.'
<i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 195. Horace Walpole describes him as 'the
rankest of all Scotchmen, and odious for that bloody speech that had
fixed on him the nick-name of <i>Starvation</i>! <i>Journal of the Reign of
George III</i>, ii. 479. On p. 637 he adds:—'The happily coined word
"starvation" delivered a whole continent from the Northern harpies that
meant to devour it.' The speech in which Dundas introduced <i>starvation</i>
was made in 1775. Walpole's <i>Letters</i>, viii. 30. See <i>Parl. Hist</i>.,
xviii. 387. His character is drawn with great force by Cockburn. <i>Life
of Jeffrey</i>, i. 77.</p>

<p>[474] The correspondent of Hume. See J. H. Burton's <i>Hume</i>, i. 320.</p>

<p>[475] See <i>post</i>, May 12, 1778.</p>

<p>[476] In the <i>Plan</i> (Works, v. 9), Johnson noticed the difference of the
pronunciation of <i>great</i>. 'Some words have two sounds which may be
equally admitted as being equally defensible by authority. Thus <i>great</i>
is differently used:—</p>

<p>'For Swift and him despised the farce of state,<br/>

The sober follies of the wise and great.'—POPE.<br/>
</p>

<p>'As if misfortune made the throne her seat,<br/>

And none could be unhappy but the great.'—ROWE.<br/>
</p>

<p>In the <i>Preface to the Dictionary</i> (<i>Works</i>, v. 25), Johnson says that
'the vowels are capriciously pronounced, and differently modified by
accident or affectation, not only in every province, but in every
mouth.' Swift gives both rhymes within ten lines:—</p>

<p>'My lord and he are grown so great—<br/>

Always together, tête-à-tête.'<br/>
</p>

<p>       *       *       *       *       *</p>

<p>'You, Mr. Dean, frequent the great, Inform us, will the emperor treat?'<br/>

Swift's <i>Works</i> (1803), x. 110.<br/>
</p>

<p>[477] 'Dr. Henry More, of Cambridge, Johnson did not much affect; he was
a Platonist, and, in Johnson's opinion, a visionary. He would frequently
cite from him, and laugh at, a passage to this effect:—"At the
consummation of all things, it shall come to pass that eternity shall
shake hands with opacity"' Hawkins's <i>Johnson</i>, p. 543.</p>

<p>[478] See <i>post</i>, April 17, 1778, and May 19, 1784.</p>

<p>[479] See <i>ante</i>, i. 240, and ii. 105.</p>

<p>[480] <i>Revelations</i>, xiv. 2.</p>

<p>[481] Johnson, in <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 78, describes man's death as 'a
change not only of the place, but the manner of his being; an entrance
into a state not simply which he knows not, but which perhaps he has not
faculties to know.'</p>

<p>[482] This fiction is known to have been invented by Daniel Defoe, and
was added to Drelincourt's book, to make it sell. The first edition had
it not. MALONE. 'More than fifty editions have not exhausted its
popularity. The hundreds of thousands who have bought the silly treatise
of Drelincourt have borne unconscious testimony to the genius of De
Foe.' Forster's <i>Essays</i>, ii. 70.</p>

<p>[483] See <i>ante</i>, i. 29.</p>

<p>[484] In his <i>Life of Akenside ( Works</i>, viii. 475) he says:—'Of
Akenside's <i>Odes</i> nothing favourable can be said…. To examine such
compositions singly cannot be required; they have doubtless brighter and
darker parts; but when they are once found to be generally dull, all
further labour may be spared; for to what use can the work be criticised
that will not be read?' See <i>post</i>, April 10, 1776.</p>

<p>[485] See <i>post</i>, just before May 15, 1776.</p>

<p>[486] See <i>post</i>, Sept. 23, 1777.</p>

<p>[487] The account of his trial is entitled:—'<i>The Grand Question in
Religion Considered. Whether we shall obey God or Man; Christ or the
Pope; the Prophets and Apostles, or Prelates and Priests. Humbly offered
to the King and Parliament of Great Britain. By E. Elwall. With an
account of the Author's Tryal or Prosecution at Stafford Assizes before
Judge Denton. London.'</i> No date. Elwall seems to have been a Unitarian
Quaker. He was prosecuted for publishing a book against the doctrines of
the Trinity, but was discharged, being, he writes, treated by the Judge
with great humanity. In his pamphlet he says (p. 49):—'You see what I
have already done in my former book. I have challenged the greatest
potentates on earth, yea, even the King of Great Britain, whose true and
faithful subject I am in all temporal things, and whom I love and
honour; also his noble and valiant friend, John Argyle, and his great
friends Robert Walpole, Charles Wager, and Arthur Onslow; all these can
speak well, and who is like them; and yet, behold, none of all these
cared to engage with their friend Elwall.' See <i>post</i>, May 7, 1773. Dr.
Priestley had received an account of the trial from a gentleman who was
present, who described Elwall as 'a tall man, with white hair, a large
beard and flowing garments, who struck everybody with respect. He spoke
about an hour with great gravity, fluency, and presence of mind.' The
trial took place, he said, in 1726. 'It is impossible,' adds Priestley
(<i>Works</i>, ed. 1831, ii. 417), 'for an unprejudiced person to read
Elwall's account of his trial, without feeling the greatest veneration
for the writer.' In truth, Elwall spoke with all the simple power of the
best of the early Quakers.</p>

<p>[488] Boswell, in the <i>Hypochrondriack</i> (<i>London Mag</i>. 1783, p. 290),
writing on swearing, says:—'I have the comfort to think that my
practice has been blameless in this respect.' He continues (p. 293):—
'To do the present age justice, there is much less swearing among
genteel people than in the last age.'</p>

<p>[489] 'The <i>Life of Dr. Parnell</i> is a task which I should very willingly
decline, since it has been lately written by Goldsmith, a man of such
variety of powers, and such felicity of performance, that he always
seemed to do best that which he was doing…. What such an author has
told, who would tell again? I have made an abstract from his larger
narrative, and have this gratification from my attempt, that it gives me
an opportunity of paying due tribute to the memory of Goldsmith. [Greek:
Togargerasesti Thanonton].' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, vii. 398.</p>

<p>[490] See <i>ante</i>, i. 26, and <i>post</i>, April 11, 1773.</p>

<p>[491] 'Mr. Ruffhead says of fine passages that they are fine, and of
feeble passages that they are feeble; but recommending poetical beauty
is like remarking the splendour of sunshine; to those who can see it is
unnecessary, and to those who are blind, absurd.' <i>Gent. Mag</i>. May,
1769, p. 255. The review in which this passage occurs, is perhaps in
part Johnson's.</p>

<p>[492] See <i>ante</i>, i. 448.</p>

<p>[493] See <i>post</i>, April 5, 1775.</p>

<p>[494] It was Lewis XIV who said it. 'Toutes les fois que je donne une
place vacante, je fais cent mecontens et un ingrat.' Voltaire, <i>Siecle
de Louis XIV</i>, ch. 26. 'When I give away a place,' said Lewis XIV, 'I
make an hundred discontented, and one ungrateful.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>,
viii. 204.</p>

<p>[495] See <i>post</i>, May 15, 1783.</p>

<p>[496] This project has since been realized. Sir Henry Liddel, who made a
spirited tour into Lapland, brought two rein-deer to his estate in
Northumberland, where they bred; but the race has unfortunately
perished. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[497] Dr. Johnson seems to have meant the Address to the Reader with a
KEY subjoined to it; which have been prefixed to the modern editions of
that play. He did not know, it appears, that several additions were made
to <i>The Rehearsal</i> after the first edition. MALONE. In his <i>Life of
Dryden</i> (<i>Works</i>, vii. 272) Johnson writes:—'Buckingham characterised
Dryden in 1671 by the name of Bayes in <i>The Rehearsal</i>…. It is said
that this farce was originally intended against Davenant, who in the
first draught was characterised by the name of Bilboa…. It is said,
likewise, that Sir Robert Howard was once meant. The design was probably
to ridicule the reigning poet, whoever he might be. Much of the personal
satire, to which it might owe its first reception, is now lost or
obscured.'</p>

<p>[498] 'The Pantheon,' wrote Horace Walpole (<i>Letters</i>, v. 489), a year
later than this conversation, 'is still the most beautiful edifice in
England.' Gibbon, a few weeks before Johnson's visit to the Pantheon,
wrote:—'In point of <i>ennui</i> and magnificence, the Pantheon is the
wonder of the eighteenth century and of the British empire.' Gibbon's
<i>Misc. Works</i>, ii. 74. Evelina, in Miss Burners novel (vol. i. Letter
xxiii.) contrasts the Pantheon and Ranelagh:—'I was extremely struck on
entering the Pantheon with the beauty of the building, which greatly
surpassed whatever I could have expected or imagined. Yet it has more
the appearance of a chapel than of a place of diversion; and, though I
was quite charmed with the magnificence of the room, I felt that I could
not be as gay and thoughtless there as at Ranelagh; for there is
something in it which rather inspires awe and solemnity than mirth and
pleasure.' Ranelagh was at Chelsea, the Pantheon was in Oxford-street.
See <i>ante</i>, ii. 119, and <i>post</i>, Sept. 23, 1777.</p>

<p>[499] Her husband, Squire Godfrey Bosville, Boswell (<i>post</i>, Aug. 24,
1780), calls 'my Yorkshire <i>chief</i>.' Their daughter was one of the young
ladies whom he passes in review in his letters to Temple. 'What say you
to my marrying? I intend next autumn to visit Miss Bosville in
Yorkshire; but I fear, my lot being cast in Scotland, that beauty would
not be content. She is, however, grave; I shall see.' <i>Letters of
Boswell</i>, p. 81. She married Sir A. Macdonald, Johnson's inhospitable
host in Sky (<i>ante</i>, ii. 157).</p>

<p>[500] In <i>The Adventurer</i>, No. 120, Johnson, after describing 'a gay
assembly,' continues:—'The world in its best state is nothing more than
a larger assembly of beings, combining to counterfeit happiness which
they do not feel.' <i>Works</i>, iv. 120.</p>

<p>[501] 'Sir Adam Fergusson, who by a strange coincidence of chances got
in to be member of Parliament for Ayrshire in 1774, was the
great-grandson of a messenger. I was talking with great indignation that
the whole (? old) families of the county should be defeated by an
upstart.' <i>Boswelliana</i>, p. 283.</p>

<p>[502] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 60.</p>

<p>[503] See <i>ante</i>, i. 424. Hume wrote of the judgment of Charles I.
(<i>Hist. of Eng</i>. vii. 148):—'If ever, on any occasion, it were laudable
to conceal truth from the populace, it must be confessed that the
doctrine of resistance affords such an example; and that all speculative
reasoners ought to observe with regard to this principle the same
cautious silence which the laws in every species of government have ever
prescribed to themselves.'</p>

<p>[504] 'All foreigners remark that the knowledge of the common people of
England is greater than that of any other vulgar. This superiority we
undoubtedly owe to the rivulets of intelligence [i. e. the newspapers]
which are continually trickling among us, which every one may catch, and
of which every one partakes.' <i>Idler</i>, No. 7. In a later number (30), he
speaks very contemptuously of news-writers. 'In Sir Henry Wotton's
jocular definition, _an ambassador is said to be a man of virtue sent
abroad to tell lies for the advantage of his country. A newswriter is <i>a
man without virtue, who writes lies at home for his own profit</i>.'</p>

<p>[505] See <i>post</i>, April 3, 1773.</p>

<p>[506] Probably Mr. Elphinston. See <i>ante</i>, i. 210, <i>post</i>, April 19,
1773, and April i, 1779. Dr. A. Carlyle (<i>Auto</i>. p. 493) wrote of a
friend:—'He had overcome many disadvantages of his education, for he
had been sent to a Jacobite seminary of one Elphinstone at Kensington,
where his body was starved and his mind also. He returned to Edinburgh
to college. He had hardly a word of Latin, and was obliged to work hard
with a private tutor.'</p>

<p>[507] 'In progress of time Abel Sampson, <i>probationer</i> of divinity, was
admitted to the privileges of a preacher.' <i>Guy Mannering</i>, chap. ii.</p>

<p>[508] In his Dictionary he defines <i>heinous</i> as <i>atrocious; wicked in a
high degree</i>.</p>

<p>[509] <i>Ephesians</i>, v. 5.</p>

<p>[510] His second definition of <i>whoremonger</i> is <i>one who converses with
a fornicatress</i>.</p>

<p>[511] It must not be presumed that Dr. Johnson meant to give any
countenance to licentiousness, though in the character of an Advocate he
made a just and subtle distinction between occasional and habitual
transgression. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[512] Erskine was born in 1750, entered the navy in 1764, the army in
1768, he matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1776, was called
to the Bar in 1778, was made a King's counsel in 1783, and Lord
Chancellor in 1806. He died in 1823. Campbell's <i>Chancellors</i>,
vi. 368-674.</p>

<p>[513] Johnson had called Churchill 'a blockhead.' <i>Ante</i>, i. 419. 'I
have remarked,' said Miss Reynolds, 'that his dislike of anyone seldom
prompted him to say much more than that the fellow is a blockhead.'
Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 834. In like manner Goldsmith called Sterne a
blockhead; for Mr. Forster (<i>Life of Goldsmith</i>, i. 260) is, no doubt,
right in saying that the author of <i>Tristram Shandy</i> is aimed at in the
following passage in <i>The Citizen of the World</i> (Letter, 74):—'In
England, if a bawdy blockhead thus breaks in on the community, he sets
his whole fraternity in a roar; nor can he escape even though he should
fly to nobility for shelter.' That Johnson did not think so lowly of
Fielding's powers is shown by a compliment that he paid Miss Burney, on
one of the characters in <i>Evelina</i>. '"Oh, Mr. Smith, Mr. Smith is the
man!" cried he, laughing violently. "Harry Fielding never drew so good a
character!"' Mme. D'Arblay's <i>Diary</i>, i. 78.</p>

<p>[514] Richardson wrote of Fielding (<i>Corres</i>, vi. 154):—'Poor Fielding!
I could not help telling his sister that I was equally surprised at and
concerned for his continued lowness. Had your brother, said I, been born
in a stable, or been a runner at a sponging-house, we should have
thought him a genius, and wished he had had the advantage of a liberal
education, and of being admitted into good company.' Other passages show
Richardson's dislike or jealousy of Fielding. Thus he wrote:—'You guess
that I have not read <i>Amelia</i>. Indeed, I have read but the first volume.
I had intended to go through with it; but I found the characters and
situations so wretchedly low and dirty that I imagined I could not be
interested for any one of them.' <i>Ib</i> iv. 60. 'So long as the world will
receive, Mr. Fielding will write,' <i>Ib</i> p. 285.</p>

<p>[515] Hannah More wrote in 1780 (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 168), 'I never saw
Johnson really angry with me but once. I alluded to some witty passage
in <i>Tom Jones</i>; he replied, "I am shocked to hear you quote from so
vicious a book. I am sorry to hear you have read it: a confession which
no modest lady should ever make. I scarcely know a more corrupt work!"
He went so far as to refuse to Fielding the great talents which are
ascribed to him, and broke out into a noble panegyric on his competitor,
Richardson; who, he said, was as superior to him in talents as in
virtue; and whom he pronounced to be the greatest genius that had shed
its lustre on this path of literature.' Yet Miss Burney in her Preface
to <i>Evelina</i> describes herself as 'exhilarated by the wit of Fielding
and humour of Smollett.' It is strange that while Johnson thus condemned
Fielding, he should 'with an ardent and liberal earnestness' have
revised Smollett's epitaph. Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 28, 1773.
Macaulay in his <i>Speech on Copyright</i> (<i>Writings and Speeches</i>, p. 615)
said of Richardson's novels:—'No writings have done more to raise the
fame of English genius in foreign countries. No writings are more deeply
pathetic. No writings, those of Shakespeare excepted, show more profound
knowledge of the human heart.' Horace. Walpole (<i>Letters</i>, iv. 305), on
the other hand, spoke of Richardson as one 'who wrote those deplorably
tedious lamentations, <i>Clarissa</i> and <i>Sir Charles Grandison</i>, which are
pictures of high life as conceived by a bookseller, and romances as they
would be spiritualised by a methodist teacher.' Lord Chesterfield says
of <i>Sir Charles Grandison</i>, that 'it is too long, and there is too much
mere talk in it. Whenever he goes <i>ultra crepidam</i> into high life, he
grossly mistakes the modes; but to do him justice he never mistakes
nature, and he has surely great knowledge and skill both in painting and
in interesting the heart.' <i>Ib</i> note. See <i>ante</i>, ii. 48.</p>

<p>[516] <i>Amelia</i> he read through without stopping. <i>Post</i>, April 12, 1776.
Shenstone (<i>Works</i>, iii. 70) writes of 'the tedious character of Parson
Adams,' and calls the book 'a very mean performance; of which the
greater part is unnatural and unhumorous.'</p>

<p>[517] Johnson wrote to Richardson of <i>Clarissa</i>, 'though the story is
long, every letter is short.' He begged him to add an <i>index rerum</i>,
'for <i>Clarissa</i> is not a performance to be read with eagerness, and laid
aside for ever; but will be occasionally consulted by the busy, the
aged, and the studious.' Richardson's <i>Corres</i>, v. 281.</p>

<p>[518] 'Our immortal Fielding was of the younger branch of the Earls of
Denbigh, who draw their origin from the Counts of Habsburg, the lineal
descendants of Eltrico, in the seventh century Duke of Alsace. Far
different have been the fortunes of the English and German divisions of
the family of Habsburg: the former, the knights and sheriffs of
Leicestershire, have slowly risen to the dignity of a peerage: the
latter, the Emperors of Germany and Kings of Spain, have threatened the
liberty of the old, and invaded the treasures of the new world. The
successors of Charles the Fifth may disdain their brethren of England;
but the romance of <i>Tom Jones</i>, that exquisite picture of human manners,
will outlive the palace of the Escurial, and the imperial eagle of the
house of Austria.' Gibbon's <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 4. Richardson, five years
after <i>Tom Jones</i> was published, wrote (<i>Corres</i>, v. 275):—'Its run is
over, even with us. Is it true that France had virtue enough to refuse a
license for such a profligate performance?'</p>

<p>[519] Mr. Samuel Paterson, eminent for his knowledge of books. BOSWELL.
In the first two editions this note does not appear, but Mr. Paterson is
described as 'the auctioneer.' See <i>post</i>, Aug. 3, 1776.</p>

<p>[520] Mr. Paterson, in a pamphlet, produced some evidence to shew that
his work was written before Sterne's <i>Sentimental Journey</i>
appeared. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[521] <i>Coryat's Crudities hastily gobled up in five Moneths Trauells in
France, Sauoy, Italy, etc. London</i>, 1611.</p>

<p>[522] 'Lord Erskine,' says Mr. Croker, 'was fond of this anecdote. He
told it to me the first time that I was in his company, and often
repeated it, boasting that he had been a sailor, a soldier, a lawyer,
and a parson.'</p>

<p>[523] 185,000. 2 <i>Kings</i>, xix. 35.</p>

<p>[524] Lord Chatham wrote on Oct. 12, 1766, to Lord Shelburne that he
'had extremely at heart to obtain this post for Lord Cardross, a young
nobleman of great talents, learning, and accomplishments, and son of the
Earl of Buchan, an intimate friend of Lord Chatham, from the time they
were students together at Utrecht.' <i>Chatham Corres</i>. iii. 106. Horace
Walpole wrote on Oct. 26, 'Sir James Gray goes to Madrid. The embassy
has been sadly hawked about it.' Walpole's <i>Letters</i>, v. 22. 'Sir James
Gray's father was first a box-keeper, and then footman to James II.'
<i>Ib</i> ii. 366.</p>

<p>[525] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 134, for Johnson's attack on Lord Chatham's
'feudal gabble.'</p>

<p>[526] In Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, on Aug. 25, 1773, Johnson makes much the
same answer to a like statement by Boswell. See <i>post</i>, March 21, 1783.</p>

<p>[527] See <i>ante</i>, i. 343, 405, and <i>post</i>, April 10, 1772.</p>

<p>[528] 'I cannot,' wrote John Wesley, (<i>Journal</i>, iv. 74), 'give up to
all Deists in Great Britain the existence of witchcraft, till I give up
the credit of all history, sacred and profane. And at the present time,
I have not only as strong but stronger proofs of this from eye and ear
witnesses than I have of murder; so that I cannot rationally doubt of
one any more the than the other.'</p>

<p>[529] See this curious question treated by him with most acute ability,
<i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>, 3rd edit. p. 33. [Aug. 16.]
BOSWELL. Johnson, in his <i>Observations on Macbeth</i> (<i>Works</i>, v. 55-7),
shews his utter disbelief in witchcraft. 'These phantoms,' he writes,
'have indeed appeared more frequently in proportion as the darkness of
ignorance has been more gross; but it cannot be shewn that the brightest
gleams of knowledge have at any time been sufficient to drive them out
of the world.' He describes the spread of the belief in them in the
middle ages, and adds:—'The reformation did not immediately arrive at
its meridian, and though day was gradually increasing upon us, the
goblins of witchcraft still continued to hover in the twilight.' See
<i>post</i>, April 8, 1779 and 1780, in Mr. Langton's <i>Collection</i>.</p>

<p>[530] The passage to which Johnson alluded is to be found (I conjecture)
in the <i>Phoenissae</i>, I. 1120. J. BOSWELL, JUN.</p>

<p>[531] Boswell (<i>Letters</i>, p. 324), on June 21, 1790, described to Temple
the insults of that 'brutal fellow,' Lord Lonsdale, and continued:—'In
my fretfulness I used such expressions as irritated him almost to fury,
so that he used such expressions towards me that I should have,
according to the irrational laws of honour sanctioned by the world, been
under the necessity of risking my life, had not an explanation taken
place.' Boswell's eldest son, Sir Alexander Boswell, lost his life in
a duel.</p>

<p>[532] Johnson might have quoted the lieutenant in <i>Tom Jones</i>, Book vii.
chap. 13. 'My dear boy, be a good Christian as long as you live: but be
a man of honour too, and never put up an affront; not all the books, nor
all the parsons in the world, shall ever persuade me to that. I love my
religion very well, but I love my honour more. There must be some
mistake in the wording of the text, or in the translation, or in the
understanding it, or somewhere or other. But however that be, a man must
run the risk, for he must preserve his honour.' See <i>post</i>, April 19,
1773, and April 20, 1783, and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 19, 1773.</p>

<p>[533] Oglethorpe was born in 1698. In 1714 he entered the army. Prince
Eugene's campaigns against the Turks in which Oglethorpe served were in
1716-17. Rose's <i>Biog. Dict</i>. vii. 266 and x. 381. He was not therefore
quite so young as Boswell thought.</p>

<p>[534] In the first two editions <i>Bender</i>. Belgrade was taken by Eugene
in 1717.</p>

<p>[535] 'Idem velle atque idem nolle ea demum firma amicitia est.'
Sallust, <i>Catilina</i>, xx. 4.</p>

<p>[536] More than one conjecture has been hazarded as to the passage to
which Johnson referred. I believe that he was thinking of the lines—</p>

<p>'Et variis albae junguntur saepe columbae;<br/>

 Et niger a viridi turtur amatur ave.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Sappho to Phaon</i>, line 37.</p>

<p>'Turtles and doves of differing hues unite,<br/>

And glossy jet is paired with shining white.' (POPE.)<br/>
</p>

<p>Goldsmith had said that people to live in friendship together must have
the same likings and aversions. Johnson thereupon calls to mind Sappho,
who had shown that there could be love where there was little likeness.</p>

<p>[537] It was not published till after Goldsmith's death. It is in the
list of new books in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for Aug. 1774, p. 378. See <i>post</i>,
under June 22, 1776, the note on Goldsmith's epitaph.</p>

<p>[538] 'Upon my opening the door the young women broke off their
discourse, but my landlady's daughters telling them that it was nobody
but the Gentleman (for that is the name that I go by in the
neighbourhood as well as in the family), they went on without minding
me.' <i>Spectator</i>, No. 12.</p>

<p>[539] The author also of the <i>Ballad of Cumnor Hall</i>. See Scott's
_Introduction to Kenilworth. Bishop Horne says that 'Mickle inserted in
the <i>Lusiad</i> an angry note against Garrick, who, as he thought, had used
him ill by rejecting a tragedy of his.' Shortly afterwards, he saw
Garrick act for the first time. The play was <i>Lear</i>. 'During the first
three acts he said not a word. In a fine passage of the fourth he
fetched a deep sigh, and turning to a friend, "I wish," said he, "the
note was out of my book."' Horne's <i>Essays</i>, ed. 1808, p. 38. See
<i>post</i>, under Dec. 24, 1783, and Garrick's letter in Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 23,1773.</p>

<p>[540] The farmer's son told Mr. Prior that 'he had felt much reluctance
in erasing during necessary repairs these memorials.' Prior's
<i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 335.</p>

<p>[541] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 178.</p>

<p>[542] Here was a blank, which may be filled up thus:—'<i>was told by an
apparition</i>;'—the writer being probably uncertain whether he was asleep
or awake, when his mind was impressed with the solemn presentiment with
which the fact afterwards happened so wonderfully to correspond.
BOSWELL. 'Lord Hardinge, when Secretary at War,' writes Mr. Croker,
'informed me, that it appears that Colonel Sir Thomas Prendergast, of
the twenty-second foot, was killed at Malplaquet, Aug. 31, 1709; but no
trace can be found of any <i>Colonel</i> Cecil in the army at that period.
Colonel W. Cecil, who was sent to the Tower in 1744, could hardly have
been, in 1709, of the age and rank which Oglethorpe's anecdote seems to
imply.' Prendergast, or Prendergrass, in the year 1696, informed the
government of the plot to assassinate William III., in which Friend was
one of the leaders. Macaulay (<i>Hist. of Eng</i>. chap. 21), calls
Prendergrass 'a Roman Catholic gentleman of known courage and honour.'
Swift, attacking Prendergast's son, attacks Prendergast himself:—</p>

<p> 'What! thou the spawn of him who shamed our isle,<br/>

 Traitor, assassin, and informer vile.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Swift's <i>Works</i>, xi. 319.</p>

<p>[543] Locke says:—'When once it comes to be a trial of skill, contest
for mastery betwixt you and your child, you must be sure to carry it,
whatever blows it costs, if a nod or words will not prevail.' He
continues:—'A prudent and kind mother of my acquaintance was, on such
an occasion, forced to whip her little daughter, at her first coming
home from nurse, eight times successively the same morning, before she
could master her stubbornness, and obtain a compliance in a very easy
and indifferent matter…. As this was the first time, so I think it was
the last, too, she ever struck her.' <i>Locke on Education</i> (ed. 1710),
p. 96.</p>

<p>[544] Andrew Crosbie, arguing for the schoolmaster, had
said:—'Supposing it true that the respondent had been provoked to use a
little more severity than he wished to do, it might well be justified on
account of the ferocious and rebellious behaviour of his scholars, some
of whom cursed and swore at him, and even went so far as to wrestle with
him, in which case he was under a necessity of subduing them as he best
could.' <i>Scotch Appeal Cases</i>, xvii. p. 214. The judgment of the House
of Lords is given in Paton's <i>Reports of Cases upon Appeal from
Scotland</i>, ii. 277, as follows:—'A schoolmaster, appointed by the
Magistrates and Town Council of Cambelton, without any mention being
made as to whether his office was for life or at pleasure: Held that it
was a public office, and that he was liable to be dismissed for a just
and reasonable cause, and that acts of cruel chastisement of the boys
were a justifiable cause for his dismissal; reversing the judgment of
the Court of Session…. The proof led before his dismission went to
shew that scarce a day passed without some of the scholars coming home
with their heads cut, and their bodies discoloured. He beat his pupils
with wooden squares, and sometimes with his fists, and used his feet by
kicking them, and dragged them by the hair of the head. He had also
entered into the trade of cattle grazing and farming—dealt in black
cattle—in the shipping business—and in herring fishing.'</p>

<p>[545] These six Methodists were in 1768 expelled St. Edmund's Hall, by
the Vice-Chancellor, acting as 'visitor.' Nominally they were expelled
for their ignorance; in reality for their active Methodism. That they
were 'mighty ignorant fellows' was shown, but ignorance was tolerated at
Oxford. One of their number confessed his ignorance, and declined all
examination. But 'as he was represented to be a man of fortune, and
declared that he was not designed for holy orders, the Vice-Chancellor
did not think fit to remove him for this reason only, though he was
supposed to be one of "the righteous over-much."' <i>Dr. Johnson: His
Friends and his Critics</i>, pp. 51-57. Horace Walpole, Whig though he was,
thought as Johnson. 'Oxford,' he wrote (<i>Letters</i> v. 97), 'has begun
with these rascals, and I hope Cambridge will wake.'</p>

<p>[546] Much such an expulsion as this Johnson had justified in his <i>Life
of Cheynel</i> (<i>Works</i>, vi. 415). 'A temper of this kind,' he wrote, 'is
generally inconvenient and offensive in any society, but in a place of
education is least to be tolerated … He may be justly driven from a
society, by which he thinks himself too wise to be governed, and in
which he is too young to teach, and too opinionative to learn.'</p>

<p>[547] Johnson wrote far otherwise of the indulgence shown to Edmund
Smith, the poet. 'The indecency and licentiousness of his behaviour drew
upon him, Dec. 24, 1694, while he was yet only bachelor, a publick
admonition, entered upon record, in order to his expulsion. Of this
reproof the effect is not known. He was probably less notorious. At
Oxford, as we all know, much will be forgiven to literary merit…. Of
his lampoon upon Dean Aldrich, [Smith was a Christ-Church man], I once
heard a single line too gross to be repeated. But he was still a genius
and a scholar, and Oxford was unwilling to lose him; he was endured with
all his pranks and his vices two years longer; but on Dec. 20, 1705, at
the instance of all the Canons, the sentence declared five years before
was put in execution. The execution was, I believe, silent and tender.'
<i>Works</i>, vii. 373-4.</p>

<p>[548] See post, p. 193, note i.</p>

<p>[549] 'Our bottle-conversation,' wrote Addison, 'is infected with
party-lying.' <i>The Spectator</i>, No. 507.</p>

<p>[550] Mrs. Piozzi, in her <i>Anecdotes</i>, p. 261, has given an erroneous
account of this incident, as of many others. She pretends to relate it
from recollection, as if she herself had been present; when the fact is
that it was communicated to her by me. She has represented it as a
personality, and the true point has escaped her. BOSWELL. She tells the
story against Boswell. 'I fancy Mr. B—— has not forgotten,'
she writes.</p>

<p>[551] See post, April 11, 1776.</p>

<p>[552] Johnson, in his Dictionary, defines <i>manufacturer</i> as a <i>workman;
an artificer</i>.</p>

<p>[553] Johnson had no fear of popular education. In his attack on
Jenyns's <i>Enquiry</i> (ante, i. 315), he wrote (<i>Works</i>, vi. 56):—'Though
it should be granted that those who are <i>born to poverty and drudgery</i>
should not be <i>deprived</i> by an <i>improper education</i> of the <i>opiate</i> of
<i>ignorance</i>, even this concession will not be of much use to direct our
practice, unless it be determined, who are those that are <i>born to
poverty</i>. To entail irreversible poverty upon generation after
generation, only because the ancestor happened to be poor, is in itself
cruel, if not unjust…. I am always afraid of determining on the side
of envy or cruelty. The privileges of education may sometimes be
improperly bestowed, but I shall always fear to withhold them, lest I
should be yielding to the suggestions of pride, while I persuade myself
that I am following the maxims of policy.' In <i>The Idler</i>, No. 26, he
attacked those who 'hold it little less than criminal to teach poor
girls to read and write,' and who say that 'they who are born to poverty
are born to ignorance, and will work the harder the less they know.'</p>

<p>[554] Tacitus's Agricola, ch. xii, was no doubt quoted in reference to
the shortness of the northern winter day.</p>

<p>[555] It is remarkable, that Lord Monboddo, whom, on account of his
resembling Dr. Johnson in some particulars, Foote called an Elzevir
edition of him, has, by coincidence, made the very same remark. <i>Origin
and Progress of Language</i>, vol. iii. 2nd ed. p. 219. BOSWELL. See
Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 21, note.</p>

<p>[556] On Saturday night Johnson recorded:—'I resolved last Easter to
read within the year the whole Bible, a very great part of which I had
never looked upon. I read the Greek Testament without construing, and
this day concluded the Apocalypse…. Easter Day. After twelve at night.
The day is now begun on which I hope to begin a new course, [Greek:
hosper aph husplaeggon], [as if from the starting-place.]</p>

<p>My hopes are from this time—<br/>

To rise early,<br/>

To waste less time,<br/>

To appropriate something to charity.'<br/>
</p>

<p>A week later he recorded:—'It is a comfort to me that at last, in my
sixty-third year, I have attained to know even thus hastily, confusedly,
and imperfectly, what my Bible contains. I have never yet read the
Apocrypha. I have sometimes looked into the Maccabees, and read a
chapter containing the question, <i>Which is the strongest?</i> I think, in
Esdras' [I Esdras, ch. iii. v. 10]. <i>Pr. and Med</i>. pp. 112-118.</p>

<p>[557] <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. iii. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[558] 'Perfect through sufferings.' <i>Hebrews</i>, ii. 10.</p>

<p>[559] 'I was always so incapable of learning mathematics,' wrote Horace
Walpole (<i>Letters</i>, ix. 467), 'that I could not even get by heart the
multiplication table, as blind Professor Sanderson honestly told me,
above three-score years ago, when I went to his lectures at Cambridge.
After the first fortnight he said to me, "Young man, it would be
cheating you to take your money; for you never can learn what I am
trying to teach you." I was exceedingly mortified, and cried; for, being
a Prime Minister's son, I had firmly believed all the flattery with
which I had been assured that my parts were capable of anything.'</p>

<p>[560] Reynolds said:—'Out of the great number of critics in this
metropolis who all pretend to knowledge in pictures, the greater part
must be mere pretenders only. Taste does not come by chance; it is a
long and laborious task to acquire it.' Northcote's <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 264.</p>

<p>[561] 'Jemmy Boswell,' wrote John Scott (afterwards Lord Eldon), 'called
upon me, desiring to know what would be my definition of taste. I told
him I must decline defining it, because I knew he would publish it. He
continued his importunities in frequent calls, and in one complained
much that I would not give him it, as he had that morning got Henry
Dundas's, Sir A. Macdonald's, and J. Anstruther's definitions. "Well,
then," I said, "Boswell, we must have an end of this. Taste, according
to my definition, is the judgment which Dundas, Macdonald, Anstruther,
and you manifested when you determined to quit Scotland and to come into
the south. You may publish this if you please."' Twiss's <i>Eldon</i>, i.
303. See <i>post</i>, April 10, 1778, note for Lord Eldon.</p>

<p>[562] Johnson (<i>Works</i>, viii. 220) says that 'Swift's delight was in
simplicity. That he has in his works no metaphor, as has been said, is
not true; but his few metaphors seem to be received rather by necessity
than choice. He studied purity…. His style was well suited to his
thoughts…. He pays no court to the passions; he excites neither
surprise nor admiration; he always understands himself, and his reader
always understands him; the peruser of Swift wants little previous
knowledge; it will be sufficient that he is acquainted with common words
and common things; … [his style] instructs, but it does not persuade.'
Hume describes Swift's style as one which he 'can approve, but surely
can never admire. It has no harmony, no eloquence, no ornament, and not
much correctness, whatever the English may imagine.' J. H. Burton's
<i>Hume</i>, ii. 413.</p>

<p>[563] Johnson's Works, v. 146.</p>

<p>[564] Dr. Warton wrote on Jan. 22, 1766:—'Garrick is entirely off from
Johnson, and cannot, he says, forgive him his insinuating that he
withheld his old editions, which always were open to him; nor, I
suppose, his never mentioning him in all his works.' Wooll's <i>Warton</i>,
p. 313. Beauclerk wrote to Lord Charlemont in 1773:—'If you do not come
here, I will bring all the club over to Ireland to live with you, and
that will drive you here in your own defence, Johnson <i>shall spoil your
books</i>, Goldsmith pull your flowers, and Boswell talk to you: stay then
if you can.' Charlemont's <i>Life</i>, i. 347. Yet Garrick had lent Johnson
some books, for Johnson wrote to him on Oct. 10, 1766:—'I return you
thanks for the present of the <i>Dictionary</i>, and will take care to return
you [qu. your] other books.' <i>Garrick Corres</i>, i. 245. Steevens, who had
edited Johnson's <i>Shakespeare</i>, wrote to Garrick:—'I have taken the
liberty to introduce your name, because <i>I have found</i> no reason to say
that the possessors of the old quartos were not sufficiently
communicative.' <i>Ib</i> p. 501. Mme. D'Arblay describes how 'Garrick,
giving a thundering stamp on some mark on the carpet that struck his
eye—not with passion or displeasure, but merely as if from
singularity—took off Dr. Johnson's voice in a short dialogue with
himself that had passed the preceding week. "David! Will you lend me
your <i>Petrarca</i>?" "Y-e-s, Sir!" "David! you sigh?" "Sir—you shall have
it certainly." "Accordingly," Mr. Garrick continued, "the book,
stupendously bound, I sent to him that very evening. But scarcely had he
taken it in his hands, when, as Boswell tells me, he poured forth a
Greek ejaculation and a couplet or two from Horace, and then in one of
those fits of enthusiasm which always seem to require that he should
spread his arms aloft, he suddenly pounces my poor <i>Petrarca</i> over his
head upon the floor. And then, standing for several minutes lost in
abstraction, he forgot probably that he had ever seen it."' Dr. Burney's
<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 352. See <i>post</i>, under Aug. 12, 1784.</p>

<p>[565] The gentleman most likely is Boswell (<i>ante</i>, ii. 14, note 1). I
suspect that this anecdote belongs to <i>ante</i>, April 14, when 'Johnson
was not in the most genial humour.' Boswell, while showing that Mrs.
Piozzi misrepresented an incident of that evening 'as a personality,'
would be afraid of weakening his case by letting it be seen that Johnson
on that occasion was very personal. Since writing this I have noticed
that Dr. T. Campbell records in his <i>Diary</i>, p. 53, that on April 1,
1775, he was dining at Mr. Thrale's with Boswell, when many of Johnson's
'bon-mots were retailed. Boswell arguing in favour of a cheerful glass,
adduced the maxim <i>in vino veritas</i>. "Well," says Johnson, "and what
then, unless a man has lived a lie." Boswell then urged that it made a
man forget all his cares. "That to be sure," says Johnson, "might be of
use, if a man sat by such a person as you."' Campbell's account confirms
what Boswell asserts (<i>ante</i>, ii. 188) that Mrs. Piozzi had the
anecdote from him.</p>

<p>[566] No. 150. The quotation is from Francis Osborne's <i>Advice to a
Son</i>. Swift, in <i>The Tatler</i>, No. 230, ranks Osborne with some other
authors, who 'being men of the Court, and affecting the phrases then in
fashion, are often either not to be understood, or appear perfectly
ridiculous.'</p>

<p>[567] See post, May 13, 1778, and June 30, 1784.</p>

<p>[568] Mrs. Piozzi, to whom I told this anecdote, has related it, as if
the gentleman had given 'the <i>natural history of the mouse</i>.' <i>Anec</i>. p.
191. BOSWELL. The gentleman was very likely Dr. Vansittart, who is
mentioned just before. (See <i>ante</i>, i. 348, note 1.) Mrs. Thrale, in
1773, wrote to Johnson of 'the man that saw the mouse.' Piozzi
<i>Letters</i>, i. 186. From Johnson's answer (<i>ib</i>. p. 197) it seems that
she meant Vansittart. Mr. Croker says 'this proves that Johnson himself
sanctioned Mrs. Piozzi's version of the story—<i>mouse versus flea</i>.' Mr.
Croker has an odd notion of what constitutes both a proof and
a sanction.</p>

<p>[569] Lord Shelburne says that 'William Murray [Lord Mansfield] was
sixteen years of age when he came out of Scotland, and spoke such broad
Scotch that he stands entered in the University books at Oxford as born
as Bath, the Vice-Chancellor mistaking <i>Bath for Perth</i>.' Fitzmaurice's
<i>Shelburne</i>, i. 87.</p>

<p>[570] The asterisks seem to show that Beattie and Robertson are meant.
This is rendered more probable from the fact that the last paragraph is
about Scotchmen.</p>

<p>[571] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 51.</p>

<p>[572] Boswell's friend was very likely his brother David, who had long
resided in Valencia. In that case, Johnson came round to Boswell's
opinion, for he wrote, 'he will find Scotland but a sorry place after
twelve years' residence in a happier climate;' <i>post</i>, April 29, 1780.</p>

<p>[573] See <i>ante</i>, i.443, note 2.</p>

<p>[574] Wilson against Smith and Armour. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[575] Lord Kames, in his <i>Historical Law Tracts</i>. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[576] 'Covin. A deceitful agreement between two or more to the hurt of
another.' Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>.</p>

<p>[577] Lord Kames (<i>Sketches of the History of Man</i>, iv. 168) says:—'The
undisciplined manners of our forefathers in Scotland made a law
necessary, that whoever intermeddled irregularly with the goods of a
deceased person should be subjected to pay all his debts, however
extensive. A due submission to legal authority has in effect abrogated
that severe law, and it is now [1774] scarce ever heard of.' Scott
introduces Lord Kames in <i>Redgauntlet</i>, at the end of chap. I of the
<i>Narrative</i>:—'"What's the matter with the auld bitch next?" said an
acute metaphysical judge, though somewhat coarse in his manners, aside
to his brethren.' In Boswell's poem <i>The Court of Session Garland</i>,
where the Scotch judges each give judgment, we read:—</p>

<p>'Alemore the judgment as illegal blames,<br/>

"Tis equity, you bitch," replies my Lord Kames.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Chambers's <i>Traditions of Edinburgh</i>, ii. 161. Mr. Chambers adds (p.
171) that when Kames retired from the Bench, 'after addressing his
brethren in a solemn speech, in going out at the door of the court room,
he turned about, and casting them a last look, cried, in his usual
familiar tone, "Fare ye a' weel, ye bitches."'</p>

<p>[578] At this time there were no civil juries in Scotland. 'But this was
made up for, to a certain extent, by the Supreme Court, consisting of no
fewer than fifteen judges; who formed a sort of judicial jury, and were
dealt with as such. The great mass of the business was carried on by
writing.' Cockbarn's <i>Jeffery</i>, i. 87. See <i>post</i>, Jan. 19, 1775, note.</p>

<p>[579] In like manner, he had discovered the <i>Life of Cheynel</i> to be
Johnson's. Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 17, 1774.</p>

<p>[580] The <i>Essay on Truth</i>, published in May, 1770. Beattie wrote on
Sept. 30, 1772:—'The fourth edition of my <i>Essay</i> is now in the press.'
Forbes's <i>Beattie</i>, ed. 1824, p. 134. Three translations—French,
Dutch, and German—had, it seems, already appeared. <i>Ib</i> p. 121. 'Mr.
Johnson made Goldsmith a comical answer one day, when seeming to repine
at the success of Beattie's <i>Essay on Truth</i>. "Here's such a stir," said
he, "about a fellow that has written one book, and I have written many."
"Ah, Doctor," says he, "there go two and forty sixpences you know to one
guinea."' Piozzi's <i>Anec</i>. p. 179. See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct
1, 1773.</p>

<p>[581] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 144, 183.</p>

<p>[582] On the same day he wrote to Dr. Taylor:—'Your uneasiness at the
misfortunes of your relations, I comprehend perhaps too well. It was an
irresistible obtrusion of a disagreeable image, which you always wished
away, but could not dismiss, an incessant persecution of a troublesome
thought, neither to be pacified nor ejected. Such has of late been the
state of my own mind. I had formerly great command of my attention, and
what I did not like could forbear to think on. But of this power, which
is of the highest importance to the tranquillity of life, I have been so
much exhausted, that I do not go into a company towards night, in which
i foresee anything disagreeable, nor enquire after anything to which I
am not indifferent, lest something, which I know to be nothing, should
fasten upon my imagination, and hinder me from sleep.' <i>Notes and
Queries</i>, 6th S., v. 383. On Oct. 6 he wrote to Dr. Taylor:—'I am now
within a few hours of being able to send the whole <i>Dictionary</i> to the
press [<i>ante</i>, ii. 155], and though I often went sluggishly to the work,
I am not much delighted at the completion. My purpose is to come down to
Lichfield next week.' <i>Ib</i> p. 422. He stayed some weeks there and in
Ashbourne. <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 55-70.</p>

<p>[583] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 141, note 3.</p>

<p>[584] 'While of myself I yet may think, while breath my body sways.'
Morris's Aeneids, iv. 336.</p>

<p>[585] It should seem that this dictionary work was not unpleasant to
Johnson; for Stockdale records (<i>Memoirs</i>, ii. 179) that about 1774,
having told him that he had declined to edit a new edition of Chambers's
<i>Dictionary of the Arts and Sciences</i>, 'Johnson replied that if I would
not undertake, he would. I expressed my astonishment that, in his easy
circumstances, he should think of preparing a new edition of a tedious,
scientific dictionary. "Sir," said he, "I like that muddling work." He
allowed some time to go by, during which another editor was found—Dr.
Rees. Immediately after this intelligence he called on me, and his first
words were:—"It is gone, Sir."'</p>

<p>[586] He, however, wrote, or partly wrote, an Epitaph on Mrs. Bell, wife
of his friend John Bell, Esq., brother of the Reverend Dr. Bell,
Prebendary of Westminster, which is printed in his <i>Works</i> [i. 151]. It
is in English prose, and has so little of his manner, that I did not
believe he had any hand in it, till I was satisfied of the fact by the
authority of Mr. Bell. BOSWELL. 'The epitaph is to be seen in the parish
church of Watford.' Hawkins's <i>Johnson</i>, p. 471.</p>

<p>[587] See <i>ante</i>, i. 187. Mme. D'Arblay (<i>Memoirs of Dr. Burney</i>, i.
271) says that this year Goldsmith projected a <i>Dictionary of Arts and
Sciences</i>, in which Johnson was to take the department of ethics, and
that Dr. Burney finished the article <i>Musician</i>. The scheme came
to nothing.</p>

<p>[588] We may doubt Steevens's taste. Garrick 'produced <i>Hamlet</i> with
alterations, rescuing,' as he said, 'that noble play from all the
rubbish of the fifth act' (<i>ante</i>, ii. 85, note 7.) Steevens wrote to
Garrick:—'I expect great pleasure from the perusal of your altered
<i>Hamlet</i>. It is a circumstance in favour of the poet which I have long
been wishing for. You had better throw what remains of the piece into a
farce, to appear immediately afterwards. No foreigner who should happen
to be present at the exhibition, would ever believe it was formed out of
the loppings and excrescences of the tragedy itself. You may entitle it
<i>The Grave-Diggers; with the pleasant Humours of Osric, the Danish
Macaroni</i>.' <i>Garrick Corres</i>. i. 451.</p>

<p>[589] A line of an epigram in the <i>Life of Virgil</i>, ascribed to Donatus.</p>

<p>[590] Given by a lady at Edinburgh. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[591] There had been masquerades in Scotland; but not for a very long
time. BOSWELL. 'Johnson,' as Mr. Croker observes, 'had no doubt seen an
account of the masquerade in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for January,' p. 43. It is
stated there that 'it was the first masquerade ever seen in Scotland.'
Boswell appeared as a dumb Conjurer.</p>

<p>[592] Mrs. Thrale recorded in 1776, after her quarrel with Baretti:—'I
had occasion to talk of him with Tom Davies, who spoke with horror of
his ferocious temper; "and yet," says I, "there is great sensibility
about Baretti. I have seen tears often stand in his eyes." "Indeed,"
replies Davies, "I should like to have seen that sight vastly,
when—even butchers weep."' Hayward's <i>Piozzi</i>, ii. 340. Davies said of
Goldsmith:—'He least of all mankind approved Baretti's conversation; he
considered him as an insolent, overbearing foreigner.' Davies, in the
same passage, speaks of Baretti as 'this unhappy Italian.' Davies's
<i>Garrick</i>, ii. 168. As this was published in Baretti's life-time, the
man could scarcely have been so ferocious as he was described.</p>

<p>[593] 'There were but a few days left before the comedy was to be acted,
and no name had been found for it. "We are all in labour," says Johnson,
whose labour of kindness had been untiring throughout, "for a name to
Goldy's play." [See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 14, 1773.] What now
stands as the second title, <i>The Mistakes of a Night</i>, was originally
the only one; but it was thought undignified for a comedy. <i>The Old
House a New Inn</i> was suggested in place of it, but dismissed as awkward.
Sir Joshua offered a much better name to Goldsmith, saying, "You ought
to call it <i>The Belle's Stratagem</i>, and if you do not I will damn it."
When Goldsmith, in whose ear perhaps a line of Dryden's lingered, hit
upon <i>She Stoops to Conquer</i>.' Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 337, and
Northcote's <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 285. Mr. Forster quotes the line of Dryden as</p>

<p>'But kneels to conquer, and but stoops to rise.'</p>

<p>In Lord Chesterfield's <i>Letters</i>, iii. 131, the line is given,</p>

<p>'But stoops to conquer, and but kneels to rise.'</p>

<p>[594] This gentleman, who now resides in America in a publick character
of considerable dignity, desired that his name might not be transcribed
at full length. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[595] Now Doctor White, and Bishop of the Episcopal Church in
Pennsylvania. During his first visit to England in 1771, as a candidate
for holy orders, he was several times in company with Dr. Johnson, who
expressed a wish to see the edition of his <i>Rasselas</i>, which Dr. White
told him had been printed in America. Dr. White, on his return,
immediately sent him a copy. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[596] Horace. <i>Odes</i>, iii. I. 34.</p>

<p>[597] See <i>post</i>, Oct. 12, 1779.</p>

<p>[598] Malone had the following from Baretti: 'Baretti made a translation
of <i>Rasselas</i> into French. He never, however, could satisfy himself with
the translation of the first sentence, which is uncommonly lofty.
Mentioning this to Johnson, the latter said, after thinking two or three
minutes, "Well, take up the pen, and if you can understand my
pronunciation, I will see what I can do." He then dictated the sentence
to the translator, which proved admirable, and was immediately adopted.'
Prior's <i>Malone</i>, p. 161. Baretti, in a MS. note on his copy of <i>Piozzi
Letters</i>, i. 225, says:—'Johnson never wrote to me French, but when he
translated for me the first paragraph of his <i>Rasselas</i>.' That Johnson's
French was faulty, is shown by his letters in that language. <i>Ante</i>, ii.
82, and <i>post</i>, under Nov. 12, 1775.</p>

<p>[599] It has been translated into Bengalee, Hungarian, Polish, Modern
Greek, and Spanish, besides the languages mentioned by Johnson. Dr. J.
Macaulay's <i>Bibliography of Rasselas</i>. It reached its fifth edition by
1761. <i>A Bookseller of the Last Century</i>, p. 243. In the same book (p.
19) it is mentioned that 'a sixteenth share in <i>The Rambler</i> was sold
for £22 2s. 6d.'</p>

<p>[600] A motion in the House of Commons for a committee to consider of
the subscription to the Thirty nine Articles had, on Feb. 23 of this
year, been rejected by 159 to 67. <i>Parl. Hist</i>. xvii. 742-758. A bill
for the relief of Protestant Dissenters that passed the House of Commons
by 65 to 14 on March 25, was rejected in the House of Lords by 86 to 28
on April 2. <i>Ib</i> p. 790.</p>

<p>[601] See <i>post</i>, April 25, 1778, where Johnson says that 'Colman [the
manager] was prevailed on at last by much solicitation, nay, a kind of
force, to bring it on.' Mr. Forster (<i>Life of Goldsmith</i>, ii. 334-6)
writes:—'The actors and actresses had taken their tone from the
manager. Gentleman Smith threw up Voting Marlow; Woodward refused Tony
Lumpkin; Mrs. Abington declined Miss Hardcastle [in <i>The Athenæum</i>, No.
3041, it is pointed out that Mrs. Abington was not one of Colman's
Company]; and, in the teeth of his own misgivings, Colman could not
contest with theirs. He would not suffer a new scene to be painted for
the play, he refused to furnish even a new dress, and was careful to
spread his forebodings as widely as he could.' The play met with the
greatest success. 'There was a new play by Dr. Goldsmith last night,
which succeeded prodigiously,' wrote Horace Valpole (<i>Letters</i>, v. 452).
The laugh was turned against the doubting manager. Ten days after the
play had been brought out, Johnson wrote to Mrs. Thrale:—'C——[Colman]
is so distressed with abuse about his play, that he has solicited
Goldsmith to <i>take him off the rack of the newspapers</i>.' <i>Piozzi
Letters</i>, i. 80. See <i>post</i>, just before June 22, 1784, for Mr.
Steevens's account.</p>

<p>[602] It was anything but an apology, unless <i>apology</i> is used in its
old meaning of <i>defence</i>.</p>

<p>[603] Nine days after <i>She Stoops to Conquer</i> was brought out, a vile
libel, written, it is believed, by Kenrick (<i>ante</i> i. 297), was
published by Evans in <i>The London Packet</i>. The libeller dragged in one
of the Miss Hornecks, 'the Jessamy Bride' of Goldsmith's verse.
Goldsmith, believing Evans had written the libel, struck him with his
cane. The blow was returned, for Evans was a strong man. 'He indicted
Goldsmith for the assault, but consented to a compromise on his paying
fifty pounds to a Welsh charity. The papers abused the poet, and
steadily turned aside from the real point in issue. At last he stated it
himself, in an <i>Address to the Public</i>, in the <i>Daily Advertiser</i> of
March 31.' Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 347-351. The libel is given in
Goldsmith's <i>Misc. Works</i> (1801), i. 103.</p>

<p>[604] '<i>Your</i> paper,' I suppose, because the <i>Chronicle</i> was taken in at
Bolt Court. <i>Ante</i>, ii. 103.</p>

<p>[605] See Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 265, for a possible explanation of
this sarcasm.</p>

<p>[606] Horace Walpole is violent against Dalrymple and the King. 'What
must,' he says, 'be the designs of this reign when George III.
encourages a Jacobite wretch to hunt in France for materials for
blackening the heroes who withstood the enemies of Protestantism and
liberty.' <i>Journal of the Reign of George III</i>, i. 286.</p>

<p>[607] Mr. Hallam pointed out to Mr. Croker that Johnson was speaking of
Dalrymple's description of the parting of Lord and Lady Russell:—'With
a deep and noble silence; with a long and fixed look, in which respect
and affection unmingled with passion were expressed, Lord and Lady
Russell parted for ever—he great in this last act of his life, but she
greater.' Dalrymple's <i>Memoirs</i>, i. 31. See <i>post</i>, April 30, 1773, for
the foppery of Dalrymple; and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, near the end, for
Johnson's imitation of Dalrymple's style.</p>

<p>[608] See <i>ante</i>, i. 334.</p>

<p>[609] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 170.</p>

<p>[610] Horace Walpole says:—'It was not Chesterfield's fault if he had
not wit; nothing exceeded his efforts in that point; and though they
were far from producing the wit, they at least amply yielded the
applause he aimed at.' <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George II</i>, i. 51.</p>

<p>[611] A curious account of Tyrawley is given in Walpole's <i>Reign of
George II</i>, iii. 108. He had been Ambassador at Lisbon, and he 'even
affected not to know where the House of Commons was.' Walpole says
(<i>Letters</i>, i. 215, note) that 'Pope has mentioned his and another
ambassador's seraglios in one of his <i>Imitations of Horace</i>.' He refers
to the lines in the <i>Imitations</i>, i. 6. 120:—</p>

<p>'Go live with Chartres, in each vice outdo<br/>

 K——l's lewd cargo, or Ty——y's crew.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Kinnoul and Tyrawley, says Walpole, are meant.</p>

<p>[612] According to Chalmers, who himself has performed this task, Dr.
Percy was the first of these gentlemen, and Dr. John Calder the
second. CROKER.</p>

<p>[613] Sir Andrew Freeport, after giving money to some importunate
beggars, says:—'I ought to give to an hospital of invalids, to recover
as many useful subjects as I can, but I shall bestow none of my bounties
upon an almshouse of idle people; and for the same reason I should not
think it a reproach to me if I had withheld my charity from those common
beggars.' <i>The Spectator</i>, No. 232. This paper is not by Addison. In No.
549, which is by Addison, Sir Andrew is made to found 'an almshouse for
a dozen superannuated husbandmen.' I have before (ii. 119) contrasted
the opinions of Johnson and Fielding as to almsgiving. A more curious
contrast is afforded by the following passage in <i>Tom Jones</i>, book i.
chap. iii:—'I have told my reader that Mr. Allworthy inherited a large
fortune, that he had a good heart, and no family. Hence, doubtless, it
will be concluded by many that he lived like an honest man, owed no one
a shilling, took nothing but what was his own, kept a good house,
entertained his neighbours with a hearty welcome at his table, and was
charitable to the poor, i.e. to those who had rather beg than work, by
giving them the offals from it; that he died immensely rich, and built
an hospital.'</p>

<p>[614] Boswell says (<i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 26, 1773):—'His recitation was
grand and affecting, and, as Sir Joshua Reynolds has observed to me, had
no more tone than it should have.' Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 302)
writes:—'His manner of repeating deserves to be described, though at
the same time it defeats all power of description; but whoever once
heard him repeat an ode of Horace would be long before they could endure
to hear it repeated by another.' See <i>ante</i>, ii. 92, note 4.</p>

<p>[615] 'Some of the old legendary stories put in verse by modern writers
provoked him to caricature them thus one day at Streatham:—</p>

<p>"The tender infant, meek and mild,<br/>

Fell down upon the stone;<br/>

The nurse took up the squealing child,<br/>

But still the child squeal'd on."<br/>
</p>

<p>'A famous ballad also beginning—<i>Rio verde, Rio verde</i>, when I
commended the translation of it, he said he could do it better himself,
as thus:—</p>

<p>"Glassy water, glassy water,<br/>

Down whose current clear and strong,<br/>

Chiefs confused in mutual slaughter,<br/>

Moor and Christian roll along."<br/>
</p>

<p>"But, Sir," said I, "this is not ridiculous at all." "Why no," replied<br/>

he, "why should I always write ridiculously?"' Piozzi's <i>Anec</i>. p. 65.<br/>

See <i>ante</i>, ii. 136, note 4. Neither Boswell nor Mrs. Piozzi mentions<br/>

Percy by name as the subject of Johnson's ridicule.<br/>
</p>

<p>[616] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 4, 1773.</p>

<p>[617] Rogers (<i>Table-Talk</i>, p. 88) said that 'Fox considered Burnet's
style to be perfect.'</p>

<p>[618] Johnson (<i>Works</i>, vii. 96) quotes; 'Dalrymple's observation, who
says "that whenever Burnet's narrations are examined, he appears to be
mistaken."' Lord Bolingbroke (<i>Works</i>, iv. 151) wrote of party pamphlets
and histories:—'Read them with suspicion, for they deserve to be
suspected; pay no regard to the epithets given, nor to the judgments
passed; neglect all declamation, weigh the reasoning, and advert to
fact. With such precautions, even Burnet's history may be of some use.'
Horace Walpole, noticing an attack on Burnet, says (<i>Letters</i>, vi.
487):—'It shows his enemies are not angry at his telling falsehoods,
but the truth … I will tell you what was said of his <i>History</i> by one
whose testimony you yourself will not dispute. That confessor said,
"Damn him, he has told a great deal of truth, but where the devil did he
learn it?" This was St. Atterbury's testimony.'</p>

<p>[619] The cross-buns were for Boswell and Levet. Johnson recorded (<i>Pr.
and Med</i>. p. 121):—'On this whole day I took nothing of nourishment but
one cup of tea without milk; but the fast was very inconvenient. Towards
night I grew fretful and impatient, unable to fix my mind or govern my
thoughts.'</p>

<p>[620] It is curious to compare with this Johnson's own record:—'I found
the service not burdensome nor tedious, though I could not hear the
lessons. I hope in time to take pleasure in public works.' <i>Pr. and
Med</i>. p. 121.</p>

<p>[621] In the original <i>in</i>.</p>

<p>[622] Afterwards Charles I. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[623] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 47.</p>

<p>[624] See <i>post</i>, April 9, 1778, where Johnson said:-'Goldsmith had no
settled notions upon any subject; so he talked always at random.'</p>

<p>[625] The next day Johnson recorded:—'I have had some nights of that
quiet and continual sleep which I had wanted till I had almost forgotten
it.' <i>Pemb. Coll. MSS</i>.</p>

<p>[626] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 11.</p>

<p>[627] We have the following account of Johnson's kitchen in 1778: 'Mr.
Thale.—"And pray who is clerk of your kitchen, Sir?" Dr. J.—"Why, Sir,
I am afraid there is none; a general anarchy prevails in my kitchen, as
I am told Mr. Levet, who says it is not now what it used to be." Mr.
T.—"But how do you get your dinners drest?" Dr. J.—"Why, Desmouline
has the chief management, for we have no jack." Mr. T.—"No jack? Why,
how do they manage without?" Dr. J.—"Small joints, I believe, they
manage with a string, and larger one done at the tavern. I have some
thoughts (with a profound gravity) of buying a jack, because I think a
jack is some credit to a house." Mr. T.—"Well, but you'll have a spit
too?" Dr. J.—"No Sir, no; that would be superfluous; for we shall never
use it; if a jack is seen, a spit will be presumed."' Mme. D'Arblay's
<i>Diary</i>, i. 115.</p>

<p>[628] See <i>ante</i>, i. 418.</p>

<p>[629] See <i>ante</i>, i. 252.</p>

<p>[630] 'By inscribing this slight performance to you, I do not mean so
much to compliment you as myself. It may do me some honour to inform the
publick, that I have lived many years in intimacy with you. It may serve
the interests of mankind also to inform them, that the greatest wit may
be found in a character, without impairing the most unaffected
piety.' BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[631] See an account of this learned and respectable gentleman, and of
his curious work in the <i>Middle State, Journal of a Tour to the
Hebrides</i>, 3rd edition. p. 371. [Oct. 25.] BOSWELL. See <i>post</i>, June
9, 1784.</p>

<p>[632] See <i>ante</i>, i. 225, for Boswell's project works, and i. 211.</p>

<p>[633] 'When the efficiency [of men and women] is equal, but the pay
unequal, the only explanation that can be given is custom.' J. S. Mill's
<i>Political Economy</i>, Book ii. ch. xiv. 5.</p>

<p>[634] The day before he told Boswell this he had recorded:—'My general
resolution, to which I humbly implore the help of God, is to methodise
my life, to resist sloth. I hope from this time to keep a journal.' <i>Pr.
and Med</i>. p. 124. Four times more he recorded the same resolution to
keep a journal. See <i>ante</i>, i. 433, and <i>post</i>, Apr. 14,1775.</p>

<p>[635] See <i>post</i>, March 30, 1778, where Johnson says:—'A man loves to
review his own mind. That is the use of a diary or journal.'</p>

<p>[636] 'He who has not made the experiment, or who is not accustomed to
require rigorous accuracy from himself, will scarcely believe how much a
few hours take from certainty of knowledge and distinctness of imagery
… To this dilatory notation must be imputed the false relations of
travellers, where there is no imaginable motive to deceive. They trusted
to memory what cannot be trusted safely but to the eye, and told by
guess what a few hours before they had known with certainty.' Johnson's
<i>Works</i>, ix. 144.</p>

<p>[637] Goldsmith, in his dedication to Reynolds of the <i>Deserted
Village</i>, refers no doubt to Johnson's opinion of luxury. He writes:—'I
know you will object (and indeed <i>several of our best and wisest
friends</i> concur in the opinion) that the depopulation it deplores is
nowhere to be seen, and the disorders it laments are only to be found in
the poet's own imagination…. In regretting the depopulation of the
country I inveigh against the increase of our luxuries; and here also I
expect the shout of modern politicians against me. For twenty or thirty
years past it has been the fashion to consider luxury as one of the
greatest national advantages.' See <i>post</i>, April 15, 1778.</p>

<p>[638] Johnson, in his <i>Parl. Debates</i> (<i>Works</i>, x. 418), makes General
Handasyd say:—'The whole pay of a foot soldier is sixpence a day, of
which he is to pay fourpence to his landlord for his diet, or, what is
very nearly the same, to carry fourpence daily to the market …
Twopence a day is all that a soldier had to lay out upon cleanliness and
decency, and with which he is likewise to keep his arms in order, and to
supply himself with some part of his clothing. If, Sir, after these
deductions he can, from twopence a day, procure himself the means of
enjoying a few happy moments in the year with his companions over a cup
of ale, is not his economy much more to be envied than his luxury?'</p>

<p>[639] The humours of Ballamagairy. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[640]</p>

<p>'Ah me! when shall I marry me?<br/>

Lovers are plenty; but fail to relieve me.<br/>

He, fond youth, that could carry me,<br/>

Offers to love, but means to deceive me.<br/>

But I will rally and combat the ruiner:<br/>

Not a look, nor a smile shall my passion discover;<br/>

She that gives all to the false one pursuing her,<br/>

Makes but a penitent and loses a lover.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Boswell, in a letter published in Goldsmith's <i>Misc. Works</i>, ii. 116,
with the song, says:—'The tune is a pretty Irish air, call <i>The Humours
of Ballamagairy</i>, to which, he told me, he found it very difficult to
adapt words; but he has succeeded very happily in these few lines. As I
could sing the tune and was fond of them, he was so good as to give me
them. I preserve this little relic in his own handwriting with an
affectionate care.'</p>

<p>[641] See <i>ante</i>, i. 408, and <i>post</i> April 7, 1776.</p>

<p>[642] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 74.</p>

<p>[643] See <i>ante</i>, i. 429.</p>

<p>[644] See ante, ii. 169, for Johnson's 'half-a-guinea's worth of
inferiority.'</p>

<p>[645] Boswell (<i>ante</i>, i. 256) mentions that he knew Lyttelton. For his
<i>History</i>, see <i>ante</i>, ii. 37.</p>

<p>[646] Johnson has an interesting paper 'on lying' in <i>The Adventurer</i>,
No. 50, which thus begins:—'When Aristotle was once asked what a man
could gain by uttering falsehoods, he replied, "Not to be credited when
he shall tell the truth."'</p>

<p>[647] Johnson speaks of the past, for Sterne had been dead five years.
Gray wrote on April 22, 1760:—'<i>Tristram Shandy</i> is still a greater
object of admiration, the man as well as the book. One is invited to
dinner where he dines a fortnight beforehand.' Gray's <i>Works</i>, ed.
1858, iii. 241.</p>

<p>[648] 'I was but once,' said Johnson, 'in Sterne's company, and then his
only attempt at merriment consisted in his display of a drawing too
indecently gross to have delighted even in a brothel.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>
(1787), xi. 214.</p>

<p>[649] Townshend was not the man to make his jokes serve twice. Horace
Walpole said of his <i>Champagne Speech</i>,—'It was Garrick writing and
acting extempore scenes of Congreve.' <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George
III</i>, iii. 25. Sir G. Colebrooke says:—'When Garrick and Foote were
present he took the lead, and hardly allowed them an opportunity of
shewing their talents of mimicry, because he could excel them in their
own art.' <i>Ib</i> p. 101, note. '"Perhaps," said Burke, "there never arose
in this country, nor in any country, a man of a more pointed and
finished wit."' Payne's <i>Burke</i>, i. 146.</p>

<p>[650] The 'eminent public character' is no doubt Burke, and the friend,
as Mr. Croker suggests, probably Reynolds. See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>,
Aug. 15, 1773, for a like charge made by Johnson against Burke. Boswell
commonly describes Burke as 'an eminent friend of ours;' but he could
not do so as yet, for he first met him fifteen days later. (<i>Post</i>,
April 30.)</p>

<p>[651] 'Party,' Burke wrote in 1770 (<i>Thoughts on the Present
Discontents</i>), 'is a body of men united for promoting by their joint
endeavours the national interest upon some particular principle in which
they are all agreed. For my part I find it impossible to conceive that
any one believes in his own politics, or thinks them to be of any
weight, who refuses to adopt the means of having them reduced into
practice.' Payne's <i>Burke</i>, i. 86.</p>

<p>[652] On May 5, and again on Nov. 10, the play was commanded by the King
and Queen. Prior's <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 394.</p>

<p>[653] <i>Absalom and Achitophel</i>, part i. l. 872.</p>

<p>[654] Paoli perhaps was thinking of himself. While he was still 'the
successful rebel' in Corsica, he had said to Boswell:—'The arts and
sciences are like dress and ornament. You cannot expect them from us for
some time. But come back twenty or thirty years hence, and we'll shew
you arts and sciences.' Boswell's <i>Corsica</i>, p. 172.</p>

<p>[655] 'The Duke of Cumberland had been forbidden the Court on his
marriage with Mrs. Horton, a year before; but on the Duke of
Gloucester's avowal of his marriage with Lady Waldegrave, the King's
indignation found vent in the Royal Marriage Act: which was hotly
opposed by the Whigs as an edict of tyranny. Goldsmith (perhaps for
Burke's sake) helped to make it unpopular with the people: "We'll go to
France", says Hastings to Miss Neville, "for there, even among slaves,
the laws of marriage are respected." Said on the first night this had
directed repeated cheering to the Duke of Gloucester, who sat in one of
the boxes.' Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 358. See <i>ante</i>, ii. 152.</p>

<p>[656] <i>Stenography</i>, by John Angell, 1758.</p>

<p>[657] See <i>post</i>, April 10, 1778.</p>

<p>[658] See <i>ante</i>, ii.</p>

<p>[659] James Harris, father of the first Earl of Malmesbury, born 1709,
died 1780. Two years later Boswell wrote to Temple: 'I am invited to a
dinner at Mr. Cambridge's (for the dinner, see <i>post</i>, April 18, 1773),
where are to be Reynolds, Johnson, and Hermes Harris. "<i>Do you think
so?" said he. "Most certainly, said I</i>." Do you remember how I used to
laugh at his style when we were in the Temple? He thinks himself an
ancient Greek from these little peculiarities, as the imitators of
Shakspeare, whom the <i>Spectator</i> mentions, thought they had done
wonderfully when they had produced a line similar:—</p>

<p>"And so, good morrow to ye, good Master Lieutenant."'</p>

<p><i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 187. It is not in the <i>Spectator</i>, but in
<i>Martinus Scriblerus</i>, ch. ix. (Swift's <i>Works</i>, 1803, xxiii, 53), that
the imitators of Shakspeare are ridiculed. Harris got his name of Hermes
from his <i>Hermes, or a Philosophical Inquiry concerning Universal
Grammar</i>. Cradock (<i>Memoirs</i>, i, 208) says that, 'A gentleman applied to
his friend to lend him some amusing book, and he recommended Harris's
<i>Hermes</i>. On returning it, the other asked how he had been entertained.
"Not much," he replied; "he thought that all these imitations of
<i>Tristram Shandy</i> fell far short of the original."' See <i>post</i>, April 7,
1778, and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Nov. 3, 1773.</p>

<p>[660] Johnson suffers, in Cowper's epitaph on him, from the same kind of
praise as Goldsmith gives Harris:—</p>

<p> 'Whose verse may claim, grave, masculine and strong,<br/>

  Superior praise to the mere poet's song.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Cowper's <i>Works</i>, v. 119.</p>

<p>[661] See <i>ante</i>, 210.</p>

<p>[662] Cave set up his coach about thirty years earlier (<i>ante</i>, i, 152,
note). Dr. Franklin (<i>Memoirs</i>, iii, 172) wrote to Mr. Straham in
1784:—'I remember your observing once to me, as we sat together in the
House of Commons, that no two journeymen printers within your knowledge
had met with such success in the world as ourselves. You were then at
the head of your profession, and soon afterwards became a member of
parliament. I was an agent for a few provinces, and now act for
them all.'</p>

<p>[663] 'Hamilton made a large fortune out of Smollett's <i>History</i>.'
Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>, i, 149. He was also the proprietor of the
<i>Critical Review</i>.</p>

<p>[664] See <i>ante</i>, i, 71.</p>

<p>[665] See <i>ante</i>, ii, 179, and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 19, 1773.
Horace Walpole wrote of the year 1773:—'The rage of duelling had of
late much revived, especially in Ireland, and many attempts were made in
print and on the stage to curb so horrid and absurd a practice.'
<i>Journal of the Reign of George III</i>, i. 282.</p>

<p>[666] Very likely Boswell. See <i>Post</i>, April 10, 1778, where he
says:—'I slily introduced Mr. Garrick's fame and his assuming the airs
of a great man'.</p>

<p>[667] In the <i>Garrick's Corres</i> up to this date there is no letter from
Lord Mansfield which answers Boswell's descriptions. To Lord Chatham
Garrick had addressed some verses from Mount Edgecumbe. Chatham, on
April 3, 1772, sent verses in return, and wrote:—'You have kindly
settled upon me a lasting species of property I never dreamed of in that
enchanting place; a far more able conveyancer than any in Chancery-land.
<i>Ib</i> i, 459.</p>

<p>[668]</p>

<p>'Then I alone the conquest prize,<br/>

When I insult a rival's eyes:<br/>

If there's, &amp;c.'<br/>
</p>

<h5>Act iii, sc. 12.</h5>

<p>[669]</p>

<p>'But how did he return, this haughty brave,<br/>

Who whipt the winds, and made the sea his slave?<br/>

(Though Neptune took unkindly to be bound<br/>

And Eurus never such hard usage found<br/>

In his Ãolian prison under ground).'<br/>
</p>

<p>Dryden, <i>Juvenal</i>, x. 180.</p>

<p>[670] Most likely Mr. Pepys, a Master in Chancery, whom Johnson more
than once roughly attacked at Streatham. See <i>post</i>, April 1, 1781, and
Mme. D'Arblay's <i>Diary</i>, ii. 46.</p>

<p>[671] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 73.</p>

<p>[672] 'Jan. 5, 1772. Poor Mr. Fitzherbert hanged himself on Wednesday.
He went to see the convicts executed that morning; and from thence in
his boots to his son, having sent his groom out of the way. At three his
son said, Sir, you are to dine at Mr. Buller's; it is time for you to go
home and dress. He went to his own stable and hanged himself with a
bridle. They say his circumstances were in great disorder.' Horace
Walpole's <i>Letters</i>, v. 362. See <i>ante</i>, i. 82, and <i>post</i>, Sept.
15, 1777.</p>

<p>[673] Boswell, in his <i>Hebrides</i> (Aug. 18, 1773) says that, 'Budgel was
accused of forging a will [Dr. Tindal's] and sunk himself in the Thames,
before the trial of its authenticity came on.' Pope, speaking of
himself, says that he—</p>

<p>'Let Budgel charge low Grub-street on his quill,<br/>

And write whate'er he pleas'd, except his will.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Prologue to the Satires</i>, 1, 378.</p>

<p>Budgel drowned himself on May 4, 1737, more than two years after the
publication of this Prologue. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. vii. 315. Perhaps the verse
is an interpolation in a later edition. See <i>post</i>, April 26, 1776.</p>

<p>[674] See <i>post</i>, March 15, 1776.</p>

<p>[675] On the Douglas Cause. See <i>ante</i>, ii. 50, and <i>post</i>, March 26,
1776.</p>

<p>[676] I regretted that Dr. Johnson never took the trouble to study a
question which interested nations. He would not even read a pamphlet
which I wrote upon it, entitled <i>The Essence of the Douglas Cause</i>;
which, I have reason to flatter myself, had considerable effect in
favour of Mr. Douglas; of whose legitimate filiation I was then, and am
still, firmly convinced. Let me add, that no fact can be more
respectably ascertained than by the judgement of the most august
tribunal in the world; a judgement, in which Lord Mansfield and Lord
Camden united in 1769, and from which only five of a numerous body
entered a protest. BOSWELL. Boswell, in his Hebrides, records on Oct.
26, 1773:—'Dr. Johnson roused my zeal so much that I took the liberty
to tell him that he knew nothing of the [Douglas] Cause.' Lord Shelburne
says: 'I conceived such a prejudice upon the sight of the present Lord
Douglas's face and figure, that I could not allow myself to vote in this
cause. If ever I saw a Frenchman, he is one.' Fitzmaurice's <i>Shelburne</i>,
i. 10. Hume 'was struck,' he writes, 'with a very sensible indignation
at the decision. The Cause, though not in the least intricate, is so
complicated that it never will be reviewed by the public, who are
besides perfectly pleased with the sentence; being swayed by compassion
and a few popular topics. To one who understands the Cause as I do,
nothing could appear more scandalous than the pleadings of the two law
lords.' J. H. Burton's <i>Hume</i>, ii. 423. In Campbell's <i>Chancellors</i>, v.
494, an account is given of a duel between Stuart and Thurlow that arose
out of this suit.</p>

<p>[677] The Fountains. <i>Works</i>, ix. 176.</p>

<p>[678] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 25.</p>

<p>[679] It has already been observed (<i>ante</i>, ii. 55), that one of his
first Essays was a Latin Poem on a glow-worm; but whether it be any
where extant, has not been ascertained. MALONE.</p>

<p>[680] 'Mallet's works are such as a writer, bustling in the world,
shewing himself in publick, and emerging occasionally from time to time
into notice, might keep alive by his personal influence; but which,
conveying little information and giving no great pleasure, must soon
give way, as the succession of things produces new topicks of
conversation and other modes of amusement.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>,
viii. 468.</p>

<p>[681] Johnson made less money, because he never 'traded' on his
reputation. When he had made his name, he almost ceased to write.</p>

<p>[682] 'May 27, 1773. Dr. Goldsmith has written a comedy—no, it is the
lowest of all farces. It is not the subject I condemn, though very
vulgar, but the execution. The drift tends to no moral, no edification
of any kind. The situations, however, are well imagined, and make one
laugh, in spite of the grossness of the dialogue, the forced witticisms,
and total improbability of the whole plan and conduct. But what disgusts
me most is, that though the characters are very low, and aim at low
humour, not one of them says a sentence that is natural or marks any
character at all. It is set up in opposition to sentimental comedy, and
is as bad as the worst of them.' Horace Walpole's <i>Letters</i>, v. 467.
Northcote (<i>Life of Reynolds</i>, i. 286) says that Goldsmith gave him an
order to see this comedy. 'The next time I saw him, he inquired of me
what my opinion was of it. I told him that I would not presume to be a
judge of its merits. He asked, "Did it make you laugh?" I answered,
"Exceedingly." "Then," said the Doctor, "that is all I require."'</p>

<p>[683] Garrick brought out his revised version of this play by Beaumont
and Fletcher in 1754-5. Murphy's <i>Garrick</i>, p. 170. The compliment is in
a speech by Don Juan, act v. sc. 2: 'Ay, but when things are at the
worst, they'll mend; example does everything, and the fair sex will
certainly grow better, whenever the greatest is the best woman in
the kingdom.'</p>

<p>[684] <i>Formular</i> is not in Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>.</p>

<p>[685]</p>

<p>'On earth, a present god, shall Caesar reign.'</p>

<p>FRANCIS. Horace, <i>Odes</i>, iii. 5.2.</p>

<p>[686] See <i>ante</i>, i. 167.</p>

<p>[687] Johnson refers, I believe, to Temple's Essay <i>Of Heroic Virtue</i>,
where he says that 'the excellency of genius' must not only 'be
cultivated by education and instruction,' but also 'must be assisted by
fortune to preserve it to maturity; because the noblest spirit or genius
in the world, if it falls, though never so bravely, in its first
enterprises, cannot deserve enough of mankind to pretend to so great a
reward as the esteem of heroic virtue.' Temple's <i>Works</i>, iii. 306.</p>

<p>[688] See <i>post</i>, Sept. 17, 1777.</p>

<p>[689] In an epitaph that Burke wrote for Garrick, he says: 'He raised
the character of his profession to the rank of a liberal art.' Windham's
<i>Diary</i>, p. 361.</p>

<p>[690] 'The allusion,' as Mr. Lockhart pointed out, 'is not to the <i>Tale
of a Tub</i>, but to the <i>History of John Bull</i>' (part ii. ch 12 and 13).
Jack, who hangs himself, is however the youngest of the three brothers
of <i>The Tale of a Tub</i>, 'that have made such a clutter in the work'
(<i>ib</i>. chap ii). Jack was unwillingly convinced by Habbakkuk's argument
that to save his life he must hang himself. Sir Roger, he was promised,
before the rope was well about his neck, would break in and cut
him down.</p>

<p>[691] He wrote the following letter to Goldsmith, who filled the chair
that evening. 'It is,' Mr. Forster says (<i>Life of Goldsmith</i>, ii. 367),
'the only fragment of correspondence between Johnson and Goldsmith that
has been preserved.'</p>

<p>'April 23, 1773.</p>

<p>'SIR,—I beg that you will excuse my absence to the Club; I am going
this evening to Oxford.</p>

<p>'I have another favour to beg. It is that I may be considered as
proposing Mr. Boswell for a candidate of our society, and that he may be
considered as regularly nominated.</p>

<p>'I am, sir,</p>

<p>'Your most humble servant,</p>

<h5>'SAM. JOHNSON.'</h5>

<p>If Johnson went to Oxford his stay there was brief, as on April 27<br/>

Boswell found him at home.<br/>
</p>

<p>[692] 'There are,' says Johnson, speaking of Dryden (<i>Works</i>, vii. 292),
'men whose powers operate only at leisure and in retirement, and whose
intellectual vigour deserts them in conversation.' See also <i>ante</i>, i.
413. 'No man,' he said of Goldsmith, 'was more foolish when he had not a
pen in his hand, or more wise when he had;' <i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr.
Langton's <i>Collection</i>. Horace Walpole (<i>Letters</i>, viii. 560), who 'knew
Hume personally and well,' said, 'Mr. Hume's writings were so superior
to his conversation, that I frequently said he understood nothing till
he had written upon it.'</p>

<p>[693] The age of great English historians had not long begun. The first
volume of <i>The Decline and Fall</i> was published three years later.
Addison had written in 1716 (<i>Freeholder</i>, No. 35), 'Our country, which
has produced writers of the first figure in every other kind of work,
has been very barren in good historians.' Johnson, in 1751, repeated
this observation in <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 122. Lord Bolingbroke wrote in
1735 (<i>Works</i>, iii. 454), 'Our nation has furnished as ample and as
important matter, good and bad, for history, as any nation under the
sun; and yet we must yield the palm in writing history most certainly to
the Italians and to the French, and I fear even to the Germans.'</p>

<p>[694] Gibbon, informing Robertson on March 26, 1788, of the completion
of <i>The Decline and Fall</i>, said:—'The praise which has ever been the
most flattering to my ear, is to find my name associated with the names
of Robertson and Hume; and provided I can maintain my place in the
triumvirate, I am indifferent at what distance I am ranked below my
companions and masters.' Dugald Stewart's <i>Robertson</i>, p. 367.</p>

<p>[695] 'Sir,' said Johnson, 'if Robertson's style be faulty, he owes it
me; that is, having too many words, and those too big ones.' <i>Post</i>,
Sept. 19, 1777. Johnson was not singular among the men of his time in
condemning Robertson's <i>verbiage</i>. Wesley (<i>Journal</i>, iii. 447) wrote of
vol. i. of <i>Charles the Fifth</i>:—'Here is a quarto volume of eight or
ten shillings' price, containing dry, verbose dissertations on feudal
government, the substance of all which might be comprised in half a
sheet of paper!' Johnson again uses <i>verbiage</i> (a word not given in his
<i>Dictionary</i>), <i>post</i>, April 9, 1778.</p>

<p>[696] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 210.</p>

<p>[697] See <i>post</i>, Oct. 10, 1779.</p>

<p>[698] 'Vertot, né en Normandie en 1655. Historien agréable et élégant.
Mort en 1735.' Voltaire, <i>Siècle de Louis XIV</i>.</p>

<p>[699] Even Hume had no higher notion of what was required in a writer of
ancient history. He wrote to Robertson, who was, it seems, meditating a
History of Greece:—'What can you do in most places with these (the
ancient) authors but transcribe and translate them? No letters or state
papers from which you could correct their errors, or authenticate their
narration, or supply their defects.' J.H. Burton's <i>Hume</i>, ii. 83.</p>

<p>[700] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 53. Southey, asserting that Robertson had never
read the Laws of Alonso the Wise, says, that 'it is one of the thousand
and one omissions for which he ought to be called rogue as long as his
volumes last.' Southey's <i>Life</i>, ii. 318.</p>

<p>[701] Ovid. de Art. Amand. i. iii. v. 13 [339]. BOSWELL. 'It may be that
our name too will mingle with those.'</p>

<p>[702] The <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for Jan. 1766 (p. 45) records, that 'a person was
observed discharging musket-balls from a steel crossbow at the two
remaining heads upon Temple Bar.' They were the heads of Scotch rebels
executed in 1746. Samuel Rogers, who died at the end of 1855, said, 'I
well remember one of the heads of the rebels upon a pole at Temple Bar.'
Rogers's <i>Table-Talk</i>, p. 2.</p>

<p>[703] In allusion to Dr. Johnson's supposed political principles, and
perhaps his own. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[704] 'Dr. Johnson one day took Bishop Percy's little daughter upon his
knee, and asked her what she thought of <i>Pilgrim's Progress</i>. The child
answered that she had not read it. "No!" replied the Doctor; "then I
would not give one farthing for you:" and he set her down and took no
further notice of her.' Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 838. Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>.
p. 281) says, that Johnson once asked, 'Was there ever yet anything
written by mere man that was wished longer by its readers, excepting
<i>Don Quixote</i>, <i>Robinson Crusoe</i>, and The <i>Pilgrim's Progress</i>?'</p>

<p>[705] It was Johnson himself who was thus honoured. <i>Post</i>, under Dec.
20, 1784.</p>

<p>[706] Here is another instance of his high admiration of Milton as a
Poet, notwithstanding his just abhorrence of that sour Republican's
political principles. His candour and discrimination are equally
conspicuous. Let us hear no more of his 'injustice to Milton.' BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[707] There was an exception to this. In his criticism of <i>Paradise
Lost</i> (<i>Works</i>, vii. 136), he says:—'The confusion of spirit and matter
which pervades the whole narration of the war of Heaven fills it with
incongruity; and the book in which it is related is, I believe, the
favourite of children, and gradually neglected as knowledge is
increased.'</p>

<p>[708] In the <i>Academy</i>, xxii. 348, 364, 382, Mr. C. E. Doble shews
strong grounds for the belief that the author was Richard Allestree,
D.D., Regius Professor of Divinity, Oxford, and Provost of Eton. Cowper
spoke of it as 'that repository of self-righteousness and pharisaical
lumber;' with which opinion Southey wholly disagreed. Southey's
<i>Cowper</i>, i. 116.</p>

<p>[709] Johnson said to Boswell:—'Sir, they knew that if they refused you
they'd probably never have got in another. I'd have kept them all out.
Beauclerk was very earnest for you.' Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug.
21, 1773.</p>

<p>[710] Garrick and Jones had been elected this same spring. See <i>ante</i>,
i. 481, note 3.</p>

<p>[711] Mr. Langton, in his <i>Collection</i> (<i>post</i>, 1780), mentions an ode
brought by Goldsmith to the Club, which had been recited for money.</p>

<p>[712] Dr. Johnson's memory here was not perfectly accurate: <i>Eugenio</i>
does not conclude thus. There are eight more lines after the last of
those quoted by him; and the passage which he meant to recite is as
follows:—</p>

<p>'Say now ye fluttering, poor assuming elves, Stark full of pride, of
folly, of—yourselves; Say where's the wretch of all your impious crew
Who dares confront his character to view? Behold Eugenio, view him o'er
and o'er, Then sink into yourselves, and be no more.'</p>

<p>Mr. Reed informs me that the Author of <i>Eugenio</i>, a Wine Merchant at
Wrexham in Denbighshire, soon after its publication, viz. 17th May,
1737, cut his own throat; and that it appears by Swift's <i>Works</i> that
the poem had been shewn to him, and received some of his corrections.
Johnson had read <i>Eugenio</i> on his first coming to town, for we see it
mentioned in one of his letters to Mr. Cave, which has been inserted in
this work; <i>ante</i>, p. 122. BOSWELL. See Swift's <i>Works</i>, ed. 1803, xix.
153, for his letter to this wine merchant, Thomas Beach by name.</p>

<p>[713] These lines are in the <i>Annus Mirabilis</i> (stanza 164) in a
digression in praise of the Royal Society; described by Johnson
(<i>Works</i>, vii. 320) as 'an example seldom equalled of seasonable
excursion and artful return.' <i>Ib</i> p. 341, he says: 'Dryden delighted to
tread upon the brink of meaning, where light and darkness begin to
mingle…. This inclination sometimes produced nonsense, which he knew;
and sometimes it issued in absurdities, of which perhaps he was not
conscious.' He then quotes these lines, and continues: 'They have no
meaning; but may we not say, in imitation of Cowley on another book—</p>

<p>"'Tis so like <i>sense</i>, 'twill serve the turn as well."'</p>

<p>Cowley's line is from his <i>Pindarique Ode to Mr. Hobs</i>:—</p>

<p>''Tis so like <i>truth</i>, 'twill serve <i>our</i> turn as well.'</p>

<p>[714] In his <i>Dictionary</i>, he defines <i>punster as a low wit, who
endeavours at reputation by double meaning</i>. See <i>post</i>, April 28, 1778.</p>

<p>[715] I formerly thought that I had perhaps mistaken the word, and
imagined it to be <i>Corps</i>, from its similarity of sound to the real one.
For an accurate and shrewd unknown gentleman, to whom I am indebted for
some remarks on my work, observes on this passage—'Q. if not on the
word <i>Fort</i>? A vociferous French preacher said of Bourdaloue, "Il preche
<i>fort bien, et</i> moi <i>bien fort</i>."'—Menagiana. See also Anecdotes
Litteraires, Article Bourdaloue. But my ingenious and obliging
correspondent, Mr. Abercrombie of Philadelphia, has pointed out to me
the following passage in <i>Menagiana</i>; which renders the preceding
conjecture unnecessary, and confirms my original statement:</p>

<p>'Madme de Bourdonne, Chanoinesse de Remiremont, venoit d'entendre un
discours plein de feu et d'esprit, mais fort peu solide, et
tresirregulier. Une de ses amies, qui y prenoit interet pour l'orateur,
lui dit en sortant, "Eh bien, Madme que vous semble-t-il de ce que vous
venez d'entendre?—Qu'il ya d'esprit?"—"Il y a tant, repondit Madme de
Bourdonne, que je n'y ai pas vu de <i>corps</i>"'—Menagiana, tome ii. p. 64.
Amsterd. 1713. BOSWELL. <i>Menagiana, ou les bans mots et remarques
critiques, historiqites, morales et derudition de M. Menage, recueillies
par ses amis</i>, published in 1693. Gilles Menage was born 1613,
died 1692.</p>

<p>[716] That Johnson only relished the conversation, and did not join in
it, is more unlikely. In his <i>charge</i> to Boswell, he very likely pointed
out that what was said within was not to be reported without. Boswell
gives only brief reports of the talk at the Club, and these not openly.
See <i>post</i>, April 7, 1775, note.</p>

<p>[717] See <i>post</i>, the passage before Feb. 18, 1775.</p>

<p>[718] By the Rev. Henry Wharton, published in 1692.</p>

<p>[719] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 126, for what Johnson said of the <i>inward light</i>.</p>

<p>[720] Lady Diana Beauclerk. In 1768 Beauclerk married the eldest
daughter of the second Duke of Marlborough, two days after her divorce
from her first husband, Viscount Bolingbroke, the nephew of the famous
Lord Bolingbroke. She was living when her story, so slightly veiled as
it is, was thus published by Boswell. The marriage was not a happy one.
Two years after Beauclerk's death, Mr. Burke, looking at his widow's
house, said in Miss Burney's presence:—'I am extremely glad to see her
at last so well housed; poor woman! the bowl has long rolled in misery;
I rejoice that it has now found its balance. I never myself so much
enjoyed the sight of happiness in another, as in that woman when I first
saw her after the death of her husband.' He then drew Beauclerk's
character 'in strong and marked expressions, describing the misery he
gave his wife, his singular ill-treatment of her, and the necessary
relief the death of such a man must give.' Mme. D'Arblay's <i>Diary</i>,
ii. 147.</p>

<p>[721] Old Mr. Langton. CROKER. See <i>post</i>, April 26, 1776.</p>

<p>[722] See <i>post</i>, Sept. 22, 1777.</p>

<p>[723] See <i>post</i>, May 15, 1776.</p>

<p>[724] The writer of hymns.</p>

<p>[725] Malone says that 'Hawkesworth was introduced by Garrick to Lord
Sandwich, who, thinking to put a few hundred pounds into his pocket,
appointed him to revise and publish <i>Cook's Voyages</i>. He scarcely did
anything to the MSS., yet sold it to Cadell and Strahan for £6000.'
Prior's <i>Malone</i>, p. 441. Thurlow, in his speech on copy-right on March
24, 1774, said 'that Hawkesworth's book, which was a mere composition of
trash, sold for three guineas by the booksellers' monopolizing.' <i>Parl.
Hist</i>. xvii. 1086. See <i>ante</i>, i. 253, note 1, and Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 3.</p>

<p>[726] Gilbert White held 'that, though most of the swallow kind may
migrate, yet that some do stay behind, and bide with us during the
winter.' White's <i>Selborne</i>, Letter xii. See <i>ante</i>, ii. 55.</p>

<p>[727] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 73.</p>

<p>[728] No. 41. 'The sparrow that was hatched last spring makes her first
nest the ensuing season of the same materials, and with the same art as
in any following year; and the hen conducts and shelters her first brood
of chickens with all the prudence that she ever attains.'</p>

<p>[729] See <i>post</i>, April 3, 1776, April 3, 1779, and April 28, 1783.</p>

<p>[730] Rousseau went further than Johnson in this. About eleven years
earlier he had, in his <i>Contract Social</i>, iv. 8, laid down certain
'simple dogmas,' such as the belief in a God and a future state, and
said:—'Sans pouvoir obliger personne à les croire, il [le Souverain]
peut bannir de l'Etat quiconque ne les croit pas: … Que si quelquiun,
après avoir reconne publiquement ces mêmes dogmes, se conduit comme ne
les croyant pas, qu'il soit puni de mort; il a commis le plus grand des
crimes, il a menti devant les lois.'</p>

<p>[731] See <i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton's <i>Collection</i>.</p>

<p>[732] Boswell calls Elwal Johnson's countryman, because they both came
from the same county. See <i>ante</i>, ii.</p>

<p>[733] Baretti, in a MS. note on <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 219,
says:—'Johnson would have made an excellent Spanish inquisitor. To his
shame be it said, he always was tooth and nail against toleration.'</p>

<p>[734] Dr. Mayo's calm temper and steady perseverance, rendered him an
admirable subject for the exercise of Dr. Johnson's powerful abilities.
He never flinched; but, after reiterated blows, remained seemingly
unmoved as at the first. The scintillations of Johnson's genius flashed
every time he was struck, without his receiving any injury. Hence he
obtained the epithet of The Literary Anvil. BOSWELL. See <i>post</i>, April
15, 1778, for an account of another dinner at Mr. Dilly's, where Johnson
and Mayo met.</p>

<p>[735] The Young Pretender, Charles Edward.</p>

<p>[736] Mr. Croker, quoting Johnson's letter of May 20, 1775 (<i>Piozzi
Letters</i>, i. 219), where he says, 'I dined in a large company at a
dissenting bookseller's yesterday, and disputed against toleration with
one Doctor Meyer,' continues:—'This must have been the dinner noted in
the text; but I cannot reconcile the date, and the mention of the death
of the Queen of Denmark, which happened on May 10, 1775, ascertains that
the date of the <i>letter</i> is correct. Boswell … must, I think, have
misdated and misplaced his note of the conversation.' That the dinner
did not take place in May, 1775, is, however, quite clear. By that date
Goldsmith had been dead more than a year, and Goldsmith bore a large
part in the talk at the Dilly's table. On the other hand, there can be
no question about the correctness of the date of the letter. Wesley, in
his <i>Journal</i> for 1757 (ii. 349), mentions 'Mr. Meier, chaplain to one
of the Hanoverian regiments.' Perhaps he is the man whom Johnson met
in 1775.</p>

<p>[737] See <i>ante</i>, i. 423, note 2.</p>

<p>[738] 'It is very possible he had to call at Covent-garden on his way,
and that for this, and not for Boswell's reason, he had taken his hat
early. The actor who so assisted him in Young Marlow was taking his
benefit this seventh of May; and for an additional attraction Goldsmith
had written him an epilogue.' Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 376.</p>

<p>[739] Johnson was not given to interrupting a speaker. Hawkins (<i>Life</i>,
p. 164), describing his conversation, says:—'For the pleasure he
communicated to his hearers he expected not the tribute of silence; on
the contrary, he encouraged others, particularly young men, to speak,
and paid a due attention to what they said.' See <i>post</i>, under April 29,
1776, note.</p>

<p>[740] That this was Langton can be seen from Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug.
22, 1773, and from Johnson's letters of July 5, 1773, July 5, 1774, and
Jan. 21, 1775.</p>

<p>[741] See <i>post</i>, April 28, 1783.</p>

<p>[742] <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 40. Boswell.</p>

<p>[743] See <i>ante</i>, i. 489.</p>

<p>[744] 'In England,' wrote Burke, 'the Roman Catholics are a sect; in
Ireland they are a nation.' Burke's <i>Corres</i>. iv. 89.</p>

<p>[745] 'The celebrated number of <i>ten</i> persecutions has been determined
by the ecclesiastical writers of the fifth century, who possessed a more
distinct view of the prosperous or adverse fortunes of the church, from
the age of Nero to that of Diocletian. The ingenious parallels of the
<i>ten</i> plagues of Egypt, and of the <i>ten</i> horns of the Apocalypse, first
suggested this calculation to their minds.' Gibbon's <i>Decline and Fall</i>,
ch. xvi, ed. 1807, ii. 370.</p>

<p>[746] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 121, 130.</p>

<p>[747] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 105.</p>

<p>[748] Reynolds said:—'Johnson had one virtue which I hold one of the
most difficult to practise. After the heat of contest was over, if he
had been informed that his antagonist resented his rudeness, he was the
first to seek after a reconciliation.' Taylor's <i>Reynolds</i>, ii. 457. He
wrote to Dr. Taylor in 1756:—'When I am musing alone, I feel a pang for
every moment that any human being has by my peevishness or obstinacy
spent in uneasiness.' <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S., v. 324. More than
twenty years later he said in Miss Burney's hearing:—'I am always sorry
when I make bitter speeches, and I never do it but when I am
insufferably vexed.' Mme. D'Arblay's <i>Diary</i>, i. 131. 'When the fray was
over,' writes Murphy (<i>Life</i>, p. 140), 'he generally softened into
repentance, and, by conciliating measures, took care that no animosity
should be left rankling in the breast of the antagonist.' See
<i>ante</i>, ii. 109.</p>

<p>[749] Johnson had offended Langton as well as Goldsmith this day, yet of
Goldsmith only did he ask pardon. Perhaps this fact increased Langton's
resentment, which lasted certainly more than a year. See <i>post</i>, July 5,
1774, and Jan. 21, 1775.</p>

<p>[750] 'Addison, speaking of his own deficiency in conversation, used to
say of himself, that with respect to intellectual wealth he could draw
bills for a thousand pounds, though he had not a guinea in his pocket.'
Johnson's <i>Works</i>, vii. 446. Somewhat the same thought may be found in
<i>The Tatler</i>, No. 30, where it is said that 'a man endowed with great
perfections without good-breeding, is like one who has his pockets full
of gold, but always wants change for his ordinary occasions.' I have
traced it still earlier, for Burnet in his <i>History of his own Times</i>,
i. 210, says, that 'Bishop Wilkins used to say Lloyd had the most
learning in ready cash of any he ever knew.' Later authors have used the
same image. Lord Chesterfield (<i>Letters</i>, ii. 291) in 1749 wrote of Lord
Bolingbroke:—'He has an infinite fund of various and almost universal
knowledge, which, from the clearest and quickest conception and happiest
memory that ever man was blessed with, he always carries about him. It
is his pocket-money, and he never has occasion to draw upon a book for
any sum.' Southey wrote in 1816 (<i>Life and Corres</i>. iv. 206):—'I wish
to avoid a conference which will only sink me in Lord Liverpool's
judgment; what there may be in me is not payable at sight; give me
leisure and I feel my strength.' Rousseau was in want of readiness like
Addison:—'Je fais d'excellens impromptus à loisir; mais sur le temps je
n'ai jamais rien fait ni dit qui vaille. Je ferais une fort jolie
conversation par la poste, comme on dit que les Espagnols jouent aux
échecs. Quand je lus le trait d'un Duc de Savoye qui se retourna,
faisant route, pour crier; <i>à votre gorge, marchand de Paris</i>, je dis,
me voilà.' <i>Les Confessions</i>, Livre iii. See also <i>post</i>, May 8, 1778.</p>

<p>[751] 'Among the many inconsistencies which folly produces, or infirmity
suffers in the human mind, there has often been observed a manifest and
striking contrariety between the life of an author and his writings; and
Milton, in a letter to a learned stranger, by whom he had been visited,
with great reason congratulates himself upon the consciousness of being
found equal to his own character, and having preserved in a private and
familiar interview that reputation which his works had procured him.'
<i>The Rambler</i>, No. 14.</p>

<p>[752] Prior (<i>Life of Goldsmith</i>, ii. 459) says that it was not a German
who interrupted Goldsmith but a Swiss, Mr. Moser, the keeper of the
Royal Academy (<i>post</i>, June 2, 1783). He adds that at a Royal Academy
dinner Moser interrupted another person in the same way, when Johnson
seemed preparing to speak, whereupon Goldsmith said, 'Are you sure that
<i>you</i> can comprehend what he says?'</p>

<p>[753] Edmund Burke he called Mund; Dodsley, Doddy; Derrick, Derry;
Cumberland, Cumbey; Monboddo, Monny; Stockdale, Stockey. Mrs. Piozzi
represents him in his youth as calling Edmund Hector 'dear Mund.'
<i>Ante</i>, i. 93, note. Sheridan's father had been known as Sherry among
Swift and his friends. Swift's <i>Works</i>, ed. 1803, x. 256.</p>

<p>[754] Mr. Forster (<i>Life of Goldsmith</i>, ii. 103) on this remarks:—'It
was a courteous way of saying, "I wish <i>you</i> [Davies] wouldn't call me
Goldy, whatever Mr. Johnson does."' That he is wrong in this is shown by
Boswell, in his letter to Johnson of Feb. 14, 1777, where he says:—'You
remember poor Goldsmith, when he grew important, and wished to appear
<i>Doctor Major</i>, could not bear your calling him <i>Goldy</i>.' See also
Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 14, 1773.</p>

<p>[755] The Reverend Thomas Bagshaw, M.A., who died on November 20, 1787,
in the seventy-seventh year of his age, Chaplain of Bromley College, in
Kent, and Rector of Southfleet. He had resigned the cure of Bromley
Parish some time before his death. For this, and another letter from Dr.
Johnson in 1784, to the same truely respectable man, I am indebted to
Dr. John Loveday, of the Commons [<i>ante</i>, i. 462, note 1], a son of the
late learned and pious John Loveday, Esq., of Caversham in Berkshire,
who obligingly transcribed them for me from the originals in his
possession. This worthy gentleman, having retired from business, now
lives in Warwickshire. The world has been lately obliged to him as the
Editor of the late Rev. Dr. Townson's excellent work, modestly entitled,
<i>A Discourse on the Evangelical History, from the Interment to the
Ascension of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ</i>; to which is prefixed, a
truly interesting and pleasing account of the authour, by the Reverend
Mr. Ralph Churton. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[756] Sunday was May 9.</p>

<p>[757] As Langton was found to deeply resent Johnson's hasty expression
at the dinner on the 7th, we must assume that he had invited Johnson to
dine with him before the offence had been given.</p>

<p>[758] In the <i>Dictionary</i> Johnson, as the second definition of
<i>metaphysical</i>, says: 'In Shakespeare it means <i>supernatural</i> or
<i>preternatural</i>.' 'Creation' being beyond the nature of man, the right
derived from it is preternatural or metaphysical.</p>

<p>[759] See <i>ante</i>, i. 437.</p>

<p>[760] Hume, on Feb. 24 of this year, mentioned to Adam Smith as a late
publication Lord Monboddo's <i>Origin and Progress of Language</i>:—'It
contains all the absurdity and malignity which I suspected; but is writ
with more ingenuity and in a better style than I looked for.' J. H.
Burton's <i>Hume</i>, ii. 466. See <i>ante</i>, ii. 74.</p>

<p>[761] Monday was May 10.</p>

<p>[762] See <i>ante</i>, i. 413. Percy wrote of Goldsmith's envy:—'Whatever
appeared of this kind was a mere momentary sensation, which he knew not
how, like other men, to conceal.' Goldsmith's <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 117.</p>

<p>[763] He might have applied to himself his own version of Ovid's lines,
<i>Genus et proavos</i>, &amp;c., the motto to <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 46:—</p>

<p>'Nought from my birth or ancestors I claim; All is my own, my honor and
my shame.'</p>

<p>See <i>ante</i>, ii. 153.</p>

<p>[764] That Langton is meant is shewn by Johnson's letter of July 5
(<i>post</i>, p. 265). The man who is there described as leaving the town in
deep dudgeon was certainly Langton. 'Where is now my legacy?' writes
Johnson. He is referring, I believe, to the last part of his playful and
boisterous speech, where he says:—'I hope he has left me a legacy.' Mr.
Croker, who is great at suspicions, ridiculously takes the mention of a
legacy seriously, and suspects 'some personal disappointment at the
bottom of this strange obstreperous and sour merriment.' He might as
well accuse Falstaff of sourness in his mirth.</p>

<p>[765] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 23, 1773, where Boswell makes the
same remark.</p>

<p>[766]</p>

<p>'Et quorum pars magna fui.'<br/>

'Yea, and was no small part thereof.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Morris, Ãneids, ii. 6.</p>

<p>[767] Johnson, as drawn by Boswell, is too 'awful, melancholy, and
venerable.' Such 'admirable fooling' as he describes here is but rarely
shown in his pages. Yet he must often have seen equally 'ludicrous
exhibitions.' Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 258) says, that 'in the talent of
humour there hardly ever was Johnson's equal, except perhaps among the
old comedians.' Murphy writes (Life, p. 139):—'Johnson was surprised to
be told, but it is certainly true, that with great powers of mind, wit
and humour were his shining talents.' Mrs. Piozzi confirms this. 'Mr.
Murphy,' she writes (<i>Anec</i>. p. 205), 'always said he was incomparable
at buffoonery.' She adds (p. 298):—'He would laugh at a stroke of
genuine humour, or sudden sally of odd absurdity, as heartily and freely
as I ever yet saw any man; and though the jest was often such as few
felt besides himself, yet his laugh was irresistible, and was observed
immediately to produce that of the company, not merely from the notion
that it was proper to laugh when he did, but purely out of want of power
to forbear it.' Miss Burney records:—'Dr. Johnson has more fun, and
comical humour, and love of nonsense about him than almost anybody I
ever saw.' Mine. D'Arblay's <i>Diary</i>, i. 204. See Boswell's own account,
<i>post</i>, end of vol. iv.</p>

<p>[768] <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 129. BOSWELL. See <i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton's
<i>Collection</i> for Johnson's study of Low Dutch.</p>

<p>[769] 'Those that laugh at the portentous glare of a comet, and hear a
crow with equal tranquillity from the right or left, will yet talk of
times and situations proper for intellectual performances,' &amp;c. <i>The
Idler</i>, No. xi. See <i>ante</i>, i. 332.</p>

<p>[770] 'He did not see at all with one of his eyes' (<i>ante</i>, i. 41).</p>

<p>[771] Not six months before his death, he wished me to teach him the
Scale of Musick:—'Dr. Burney, teach me at least the alphabet of your
language.' BURNEY.</p>

<p>[772] Accurata Burdonum [i.e. Scaligerorum] Fabulæ Confutatio (auctore
I. R). Lugduni Batavorum. Apud Ludovicum Elzevirium MDCXVII. BRIT. MUS.
CATALOGUE.</p>

<p>[773] Mrs. Piozzi's <i>Anecdotes of Johnson</i>, p. 131. BOSWELL. Mrs. Piozzi
(<i>Anec</i>. p. 129) describes her mother and Johnson as 'excellent, far
beyond the excellence of any other man and woman I ever yet saw. As her
conduct extorted his truest esteem, her cruel illness excited all his
tenderness. He acknowledged himself improved by her piety, and over her
bed with the affection of a parent, and the reverence of a son.'
Baretti, in a MS. note on <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 81, says that 'Johnson
could not much near Mrs. Salusbury, nor Mrs. Salusbury him, when they
first knew each other. But her cancer moved his compassion, and made
them friends.' Johnson, recording her death, says:—'Yesterday, as I
touched her hand and kissed it, she pressed my hand between her two
hands, which she probably intended as the parting caress … This
morning being called about nine to feel her pulse, I said at parting,
"God bless you; for Jesus Christ's sake." She smiled as pleased.' <i>Pr.
and Med</i>. p. 128.</p>

<p>[774] Johnson wrote to Dr. Taylor July 22, 1782:—'Sir Robert Chambers
slipped this session through the fingers of revocation, but I am in
doubt of his continuance. Shelburne seems to be his enemy. Mrs. Thrale
says they will do him no harm. She perhaps thinks there is no harm
without hanging. The mere act of recall strips him of eight thousand a
year.' <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S., v. 462.</p>

<p>[775] Beattie was Professor of Moral Philosophy. For some years his
'English friends had tried to procure for him a permanent provision
beyond the very moderate emoluments arising from his office.' Just
before Johnson wrote, Beattie had been privately informed that he was to
have a pension of £200 a year. Forbes's <i>Beattie</i>, ed. 1824, pp. 145,
151. When Johnson heard of this 'he clapped his hands, and cried, "O
brave we!"' Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 26.</p>

<p>[776] Langton. See <i>ante</i>, p. 254, note 2.</p>

<p>[777] Langton—his native village.</p>

<p>[778] See <i>ante</i>, p. 261, note 2.</p>

<p>[779] That he set out on this day is shewn by his letter to Mrs. Thrale.
<i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 103. The following anecdote in the <i>Memoir of
Goldsmith</i>, prefixed to his <i>Misc. Works</i> (i. 110), is therefore
inaccurate:—'I was dining at Sir Joshua Reynolds's, August 7, 1773,
where were the Archbishop of Tuam and Mr. (now Lord) Eliot, when the
latter making use of some sarcastical reflections on Goldsmith, Johnson
broke out warmly in his defence, and in the course of a spirited
eulogium said, "Is there a man, Sir, now who can pen an essay with such
ease and elegance as Goldsmith?"' Johnson did in August, 1783, dine at
Reynolds's, and meet there the Archbishop of Tuam, 'a man coarse of
voice and inelegant of language' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 300.</p>

<p>[780] It was on Saturday the 14th of August that he arrived.</p>

<p>[781] From Aug. 14 to Nov. 22 is one hundred days.</p>

<p>[782] It is strange that not one of the four conferred on him an
honorary degree. This same year Beattie had been thus honoured at
Oxford. Gray, who visited Aberdeen eight years before Johnson, was
offered the degree of doctor of laws, 'which, having omitted to take it
at Cambridge, he thought it decent to refuse.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>,
viii. 479.</p>

<p>[783] He was long remembered amongst the lower order of Hebrideans by
the title of <i>Sassenach More</i>, the <i>big Englishman</i>. WALTER SCOTT.</p>

<p>[784] The first edition was published in September, 1785. In the
following August, in his preface to the third edition, Boswell speaks of
the first two editions 'as large impressions.'</p>

<p>[785] The authour was not a small gainer by this extraordinary Journey;
for Dr. Johnson thus writes to Mrs. Thrale, Nov. 3, 1773:—'Boswell will
praise my resolution and perseverance, and I shall in return celebrate
his good humour and perpetual cheerfulness. He has better faculties than
I had imagined; more justness of discernment, and more fecundity of
images. It is very convenient to travel with him; for there is no house
where he is not received with kindness and respect.' Let. 90, to Mrs.
Thrale. [<i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 198.] MALONE.</p>

<p>[786] 'The celebrated Flora Macdonald. See Boswell's <i>Tour</i>' COURTENAY.</p>

<p>[787] Lord Eldon (at that time Mr. John Scott) has the following
reminiscences of this visit:—'I had a walk in New Inn Hall Garden with
Dr. Johnson and Sir Robert Chambers [Principal of the Hall]. Sir Robert
was gathering snails, and throwing them over the wall into his
neighbours garden. The Doctor repreached him very roughly, and stated to
him that this was unmannerly and unneighbourly. "Sir," said Sir Robert,
"my neighbour is a Dissenter." "Oh!" said the Doctor, "if so, Chambers,
toss away, toss away, as hard as you can." He was very absent. I have
seen him standing for a very long time, without moving, with a foot on
each side the kennel which was then in the middle of the High Street,
with his eyes fixed on the water running in it. In the common-room of
University College he was dilating upon some subject, and the then head
of Lincoln College, Dr. Mortimer, occasionally interrupted him, saying,
"I deny that." This was often repeated, and observed upon by Johnson, in
terms expressive of increasing displeasure and anger. At length upon the
Doctor's repeating the words, "I deny that," "Sir, Sir," said Johnson,
"you must have forgot that an author has said: <i>Plus negabit tinus
asinus in una hora quam centum philosophi probaverint in centum
annis</i>."' [Dr. Fisher, who related this story to Mr. Croker, described
Dr. Mortimer as 'a Mr. Mortimer, a shallow under-bred man, who had no
sense of Johnson's superiority. He flatly contradicted some assertion
which Johnson had pronounced to be as clear as that two and two make
four.' Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 483.] 'Mrs. John Scott used to relate that
she had herself helped Dr. Johnson one evening to fifteen cups of tea.'
Twiss's <i>Eldon</i>, i. 87.</p>

<p>[788] In this he shewed a very acute penetration. My wife paid him the
most assiduous and respectful attention, while he was our guest; so that
I wonder how he discovered her wishing for his departure. The truth is,
that his irregular hours and uncouth habits, such as turning the candles
with their heads downwards, when they did not burn bright enough, and
letting the wax drop upon the carpet, could not but be disagreeable to a
lady. Besides, she had not that high admiration of him which was felt by
most of those who knew him; and what was very natural to a female mind,
she thought he had too much influence over her husband. She once in a
little warmth, made, with more point than justice, this remark upon that
subject: 'I have seen many a bear led by a man; but I never before saw a
man led by a bear.' BOSWELL. See <i>ante</i>, ii. 66.</p>

<p>[789] Sir Alexander Gordon, one of the Professors at Aberdeen. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[790] This was a box containing a number of curious things which he had
picked up in Scotland, particularly some horn spoons. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[791] The Rev. Dr. Alexander Webster, one of the ministers of Edinburgh,
a man of distinguished abilities, who had promised him information
concerning the Highlands and Islands of Scotland. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[792] The Macdonalds always laid claim to be placed on the right of the
whole clans, and those of that tribe assign the breach of this order at
Culloden as one cause of the loss of the day. The Macdonalds, placed on
the left wing, refused to charge, and positively left the field
unassailed and unbroken. Lord George Murray in vain endeavoured to urge
them on by saying, that their behaviour would make the left the right,
and that he himself would take the name of Macdonald. WALTER SCOTT.</p>

<p>[793] The whole of the first volume is Johnson's and three-quarters of
the second. A second edition was published the following year, with a
third volume added, which also contained pieces by Johnson, but no
apology from Davies.</p>

<p>[794] 'When Davies printed the <i>Fugitive Pieces</i> without his knowledge
or consent; "How," said I, "would Pope have raved had he been served
so?" "We should never," replied he, "have heard the last on't, to be
sure; but then Pope was a narrow man: I will however," added he, "storm
and bluster <i>myself</i> a little this time;"—so went to London in all the
wrath he could muster up. At his return I asked how the affair ended:</p>

<p>'"Why," said he, "I was a fierce fellow, and pretended to be very angry,
and Thomas was a good-natured fellow, and pretended to be very sorry; so
<i>there</i> the matter ended: I believe the dog loves me dearly. Mr. Thrale"
(turning to my husband), "What shall you and I do that is good for Tom
Davies? We will do something for him to be sure."' Piozzi's <i>Anec</i>.
p. 55.</p>

<p>[795] <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[796] The ancient Burgh of Prestick, in Ayrshire. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[797] Perhaps Johnson imperfectly remembered, '<i>novae rediere in
pristina vires</i>.' <i>AEneid</i>, xii. 424.</p>

<p>[798] See <i>ante</i>, i. 437. The decision was given on Feb. 22 against the
perpetual right. 'By the above decision near 200,000£. worth of what was
honestly purchased at public sale, and which was yesterday thought
property, is now reduced to nothing…. The English booksellers have now
no other security in future for any literary purchase they may make but
the statute of the 8th of Queen Anne, which secures to the authors
assigns an exclusive property for 14 years, to revert again to the
author, and vest in him for 14 years more.' <i>Ann. Reg</i>. 1774, i. 95.</p>

<p>[799] Murphy was a barrister as well as author.</p>

<p>[800] Mr. Croker quotes a note by Malone to show that in the catalogue
of Steevens's Library this book is described as a quarto, <i>corio turcico
foliis deauratis</i>.</p>

<p>[801] A manuscript account drawn by Dr. Webster of all the parishes in
Scotland, ascertaining their length, breadth, number of inhabitants, and
distinguishing Protestants and Roman Catholicks. This book had been
transmitted to government, and Dr. Johnson saw a copy of it in Dr.
Webster's possession. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[802] Beauclerk, three weeks earlier, had written to Lord
Charlemont:—'Our club has dwindled away to nothing. Nobody attends but
Mr. Chambers, and he is going to the East Indies. Sir Joshua and
Goldsmith have got into such a round of pleasures that they have no
time.' Charlemont's <i>Life</i>, i. 350. Johnson, no doubt, had been kept
away by illness (<i>ante</i>, p. 272).</p>

<p>[803] Mr. Fox, as Sir James Mackintosh informed me, was brought in by
Burke. CROKER.</p>

<p>[804] Sir C. Bunbury was the brother of Mr. H. W. Bunbury, the
caricaturist, who married Goldsmith's friend, the elder Miss
Horneck—'Little Comedy' as she was called. Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>,
ii. 147.</p>

<p>[805] Rogers (<i>Table-Talk</i>, p. 23) tells how Dr. Fordyce, who sometimes
drank a good deal, was summoned to a lady patient when he was conscious
that he had had too much wine. 'Feeling her pulse, and finding himself
unable to count its beats, he muttered, "Drunk by G—." Next morning a
letter from her was put into his hand. "She too well knew," she wrote,
"that he had discovered the unfortunate condition in which she had been,
and she entreated him to keep the matter secret in consideration of the
enclosed (a hundred-pound bank-note)."'</p>

<p>[806] Steevens wrote to Garrick on March 6:—'Mr. C. Fox pays you but a
bad compliment; as he appears, like the late Mr. Secretary Morris, to
enter the society at a time when he has <i>nothing else to do</i>. If the
<i>bon ton</i> should prove a contagious disorder among us, it will be
curious to trace its progress. I have already seen it breaking out in
Dr. G——[Goldsmith] under the form of many a waistcoat, but I believe
Dr. G—— will be the last man in whom the symptoms of it will be
detected.' <i>Garrick Corres</i>. i. 613. In less than a month poor Goldsmith
was dead. Fox, just before his election to the club, had received
through one of the doorkeepers of the House of Commons the following
note:—'SIR,—His Majesty has thought proper to order a new commission
of the Treasury to be made out, in which I do not perceive your
name. NORTH.'</p>

<p>[807] See Boswell's answer, <i>post</i>, May 12.</p>

<p>[808] See <i>post</i>, April 16, 1775.</p>

<p>[809] See <i>ante</i>, i. 122, note 2.</p>

<p>[810] Iona.</p>

<p>[811] 'I was induced,' he says, 'to undertake the journey by finding in
Mr. Boswell a companion, whose acuteness would help my inquiry, and
whose gaiety of conversation and civility of manners are sufficient to
counteract the inconveniences of travel in countries less hospitable
than we have passed.' Quoted by Boswell in his <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug.
18, 1773.</p>

<p>[812] See <i>post</i>, Nov. 16, 1776.</p>

<p>[813] Boswell wrote to Temple on May 8, 1779:—'I think Dr. Johnson
never answered but three of my letters, though I have had numerous
returns from him.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>. See <i>post</i>, Sept. 29, 1777.</p>

<p>[814] Dr. Goldsmith died April 4, this year. BOSWELL. Boswell wrote to
Garrick on April 11, 1774:—'Dr. Goldsmith's death would affect all the
club much. I have not been so much affected with any event that has
happened of a long time. I wish you would give me, who am at a distance,
some particulars with regard to his last appearance.' <i>Garrick
Corres</i>. i. 622.</p>

<p>[815] See <i>ante</i>, p. 265.</p>

<p>[816] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 27, and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 29, 1773.</p>

<p>[817] These books Dr. Johnson presented to the Bodleian Library,
BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[818] On the cover enclosing them, Dr. Johnson wrote, 'If my delay has
given any reason for supposing that I have not a very deep sense of the
honour done me by asking my judgement, I am very sorry.' BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[819] See <i>post</i>, March 20, 1776.</p>

<p>[820] 'Sir Joshua was much affected by the death of Goldsmith, to whom
he had been a very sincere friend. He did not touch the pencil for that
day, a circumstance most extraordinary for him who passed <i>no day
without a line</i>. Northcote's <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 325.</p>

<p>[821] He owed his tailor £79, though he had paid him £110 in 1773. In
this payment was included £35 for his nephew's clothes. We find such
entries in his own bills as—'To Tyrian bloom satin grain and, garter
blue silk beeches 8£ 2s. 7d. To Queen's-blue dress suit 11£ 17s. 0d. To
your blue velvet suit 21£ 10s. 9d.' (See <i>ante</i>, ii. 83.) Filby's son
said to Mr. Prior:—'My father attributed no blame to Goldsmith; he had
been a good customer, and had he lived would have paid every farthing.'
Prior's <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 232.</p>

<p>[822] 'Soon after Goldsmith's death certain persons dining with Sir
Joshua commented rather freely on some part of his works, which, in
their opinion, neither discovered talent nor originality. To this Dr.
Johnson listened in his usual growling manner; when, at length, his
patience being exhausted, he rose with great dignity, looked them full
in the face, and exclaimed, "If nobody was suffered to abuse poor Goldy,
but those who could write as well, he would have few censors."'
Northcote's <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 327. To Goldsmith might be applied the words
that Johnson wrote of Savage (<i>Works</i>, viii. 191):—'Vanity may surely
be readily pardoned in him to whom life afforded no other comforts than
barren praises, and the consciousness of deserving them. Those are no
proper judges of his conduct who have slumbered away their time on the
down of plenty; nor will any wise man presume to say, "Had I been in
Savage's condition, I should have lived or written better than Savage."'</p>

<p>[823] Mrs. Thrale's mother died the summer before (<i>ante</i>, p. 263). Most
of her children died early. By 1777 she had lost seven out of eleven.
<i>Post</i>, May 3, 1777.</p>

<p>[824] Johnson had not seen Langton since early in the summer of 1773. He
was then suffering from a fever and an inflammation in the eye, for
which he was twice copiously bled. (<i>Pr. and Med</i>. 130.) The following
winter he was distressed by a cough. (<i>Ib</i> p. 135.) Neither of these
illnesses was severe enough to be called dreadful. In the spring of 1770
he was very ill. (<i>Ib</i> p. 93.) On Sept. 18, 1771, he records:—'For the
last year I have been slowly recovering from the violence of my last
illness.' (<i>Ib</i> p. 104.) On April 18, 1772, in reviewing the last year,
he writes:—'An unpleasing incident is almost certain to hinder my rest;
this is the remainder of my last illness.' (<i>Ib</i> p. iii.) In the winter
of 1772-3, he suffered from a cough. (<i>Ib</i> p. 121.) I think that he must
mean the illness of 1770, though it is to be noticed that he wrote to
Boswell on July 5, 1773:—'Except this eye [the inflamed eye] I am very
well.' (<i>Ante</i>, p. 264.)</p>

<p>[825] 'Lord have mercy upon us.'</p>

<p>[826] See Johnson's <i>Works</i>, i. 172, for his Latin version. D'Israeli
(<i>Curiosities of Literature</i>, ed. 1834, vi. 368) says 'that Oldys
[<i>ante</i>, i. 175] always asserted that he was the author of this song,
and as he was a rigid lover of truth I doubt not that he wrote it. I
have traced it through a dozen of collections since the year 1740, the
first in which I find it.'</p>

<p>[827] Mr. Seward (<i>Anec</i>, ii. 466) gives the following version of these
lines:</p>

<p>'Whoe'er thou art with reverence tread<br/>

Where Goldsmith's letter'd dust is laid.<br/>

If nature and the historic page,<br/>

If the sweet muse thy care engage.<br/>

Lament him dead whose powerful mind<br/>

Their various energies combined.'<br/>
</p>

<p>[828] See <i>ante</i>, p. 265.</p>

<p>[829] At Lleweney, the house of Mrs. Thrale's cousin, Mr. Cotton, Dr.
Johnson stayed nearly three weeks. Johnson's <i>Journey into North Wales</i>,
July 28, 1774. Mr. Fitzmaurice, Lord Shelburne's brother, had a house
there in 1780; for Johnson wrote to Mrs. Thrale on May 7 of that
year:—'He has almost made me promise to pass part of the summer at
Llewenny.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 113.</p>

<p>[830] Lord Hailes was Sir David Dalrymple. See <i>ante</i>, i. 267. He is not
to be confounded with Sir John Dalrymple, mentioned <i>ante</i>, ii. 210.</p>

<p>[831]</p>

<p>E'en in a bishop I can spy desert;<br/>

Seeker is decent, Rundel has a heart.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Pope's <i>Epilogue to the Satires</i>, ii. 70.</p>

<p>[832] In the first two editions <i>forenoon</i>. Boswell, in three other
passages, made the same change in the third edition. <i>Forenoon</i> perhaps
he considered a Scotticism. The correction above being made in one of
his letters, renders it likely that he corrected them before
publication.</p>

<p>[833] Horace, <i>Ars Poet</i>. l. 373.</p>

<p>[834] 'Do not you long to hear the roarings of the old lion over the
bleak mountains of the North?' wrote Steevens to Garrick. <i>Garrick
Corres</i>, ii. 122.</p>

<p>[835] 'Aug. 16. We came to Penmanmaur by daylight, and found a way,
lately made, very easy and very safe. It was cut smooth and enclosed
between parallel walls; the outer of which secures the passenger from
the precipice, which is deep and dreadful…. The sea beats at the
bottom of the way. At evening the moon shone eminently bright: and our
thoughts of danger being now past, the rest of our journey was very
pleasant. At an hour somewhat late we came to Bangor, where we found a
very mean inn, and had some difficulty to obtain lodging. I lay in a
room where the other bed had two men.' Johnson's <i>Journey into
North Wales</i>.</p>

<p>[836] He did not go to the top of Snowdon. He says:—'On the side of
Snowdon are the remains of a large fort, to which we climbed with great
labour. I was breathless and harassed,' <i>Ib</i> Aug. 26.</p>

<p>[837] I had written to him, to request his interposition in behalf of a
convict, who I thought was very unjustly condemned. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[838] He had kept a journal which was edited by Mr. Duppa in 1816. It
will be found <i>post</i>, in vol. v.</p>

<p>[839] 'When the general election broke up the delightful society in
which we had spent some time at Beconsfield, Dr. Johnson shook the
hospitable master of the house [Burke] kindly by the hand, and said,
"Farewell my dear Sir, and remember that I wish you all the success
which ought to be wished you, which can possibly be wished you
indeed—<i>by an honest man</i>."' Piozzi's <i>Anec</i>. p. 242. The dissolution
was on Sept. 30. Johnson, with the Thrales, as his <i>Journal</i> shows, had
arrived at Beconsfield on the 24th. See <i>ante</i>, ii. 222, for Johnson's
opinion of Burke's honesty.</p>

<p>[840] Mr. Perkins was for a number of years the worthy superintendant of
Mr. Thrale's great brewery, and after his death became one of the
proprietors of it; and now resides in Mr. Thrale's house in Southwark,
which was the scene of so many literary meetings, and in which he
continues the liberal hospitality for which it was eminent. Dr. Johnson
esteemed him much. He hung up in the counting-house a fine proof of the
admirable mizzotinto of Dr. Johnson, by Doughty; and when Mrs. Thrale
asked him somewhat flippantly, 'Why do you put him up in the
counting-house?' he answered, 'Because, Madam, I wish to have one wise
man there.' 'Sir,' (said Johnson,) 'I thank you. It is a very handsome
compliment, and I believe you speak sincerely.' BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[841] In the news-papers. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[842] 'Oct. 16, 1774. In Southwark there has been outrageous rioting;
but I neither know the candidates, their connections, nor success.'
Horace Walpole's <i>Letters</i>, vi. 134. Of one Southwark election Mrs.
Piozzi writes (<i>Anec</i>. p. 214):—'A Borough election once showed me Mr.
Johnson's toleration of boisterous mirth. A rough fellow, a hatter by
trade, seeing his beaver in a state of decay seized it suddenly with one
hand, and clapping him on the back with the other. "Ah, Master Johnson,"
says he, "this is no time to be thinking about <i>hats</i>." "No, no, Sir,"
replies our doctor in a cheerful tone, "hats are of no use now, as you
say, except to throw up in the air and huzza with," accompanying his
words with the true election halloo.'</p>

<p>[843] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 19, 1773. Johnson thus mentions him
(<i>Works</i>, ix. 142):—'Here we had the last embrace of this amiable man,
who, while these pages were preparing to attest his virtues, perished in
the passage between Ulva and Inch Kenneth.'</p>

<p>[844] Alluding to a passage in a letter of mine, where speaking of his
<i>Journey to the Hebrides</i>, I say, 'But has not <i>The Patriot</i> been an
interruption, by the time taken to write it, and the time luxuriously
spent in listening to its applauses?' BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[845] We had projected a voyage together up the Baltic, and talked of
visiting some of the more northern regions. BOSWELL. See Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 16.</p>

<p>[846] See <i>ante</i>, i. 72.</p>

<p>[847] John Hoole, the son of a London watchmaker, was born in Dec. 1727,
and died on Aug. 2, 1803. At the age of seventeen he was placed as a
clerk in the East-India House; but, like his successors, James and John
Stuart Mill, he was an author as well as a clerk. See <i>ante</i>, i. 383.</p>

<p>[848] <i>Cleonice</i>. BOSWELL. Nichols (<i>Lit. Anec</i>. ii. 407) says that as
<i>Cleonice</i> was a failure on the stage 'Mr. Hoole returned a considerable
part of the money which he had received for the copy-right, alleging
that, as the piece was not successful on the stage, it could not be very
profitable to the bookseller, and ought not to be a loss.'</p>

<p>[849] See <i>ante</i>, i. 255.</p>

<p>[850] See <i>post</i>, March 20, 1776.</p>

<p>[851] 'The King,' wrote Horace Walpole on Jan. 21, 1775 (<i>Letters</i>, vi.
179), 'sent for the book in MS., and then wondering said, "I protest,
Johnson seems to be a Papist and a Jacobite—so he did not know why he
had been made to give him a pension."'</p>

<p>[852] Boswell's little daughter. Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug, 15, 1773.</p>

<p>[853] 'Bis dat qui cito dat, minimi gratia tarda pretii est.' Alciat's
<i>Emblems</i>, Alciati <i>Opera</i> 1538, p. 821.</p>

<p>[854] It was at the Turk's Head coffee-house in the Strand. See <i>ante</i>,
i. 450.</p>

<p>[855] <i>Hamlet</i>, act iii. sc. 2.</p>

<p>[856] 'Exegi monumentum ære perennius.' Horace, <i>Odes</i>, iii. 30. I.</p>

<p>[857] The second edition was not brought out till the year after
Johnson's death. These mistakes remain uncorrected. Johnson's <i>Works</i>,
ix. 44. 150.</p>

<p>[858] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 23.</p>

<p>[859] In the Court of Session of Scotland an action is first tried by
one of the Judges, who is called the Lord Ordinary; and if either party
is dissatisfied, he may appeal to the whole Court, consisting of
fifteen, the Lord President and fourteen other Judges, who have both in
and out of Court the title of Lords, from the name of their estates; as,
Lord Auchinleck, Lord Monboddo, &amp;c. BOSWELL. See <i>ante</i>, ii. 201,
note 1.</p>

<p>[860] Johnson had thus written of him (<i>Works</i>, ix. 115):—'I suppose my
opinion of the poems of Ossian is already discovered. I believe they
never existed in any other form than that which we have seen. The
editor, or author, never could show the original; nor can it be shown by
any other. To revenge reasonable incredulity by refusing evidence is a
degree of insolence with which the world is not yet acquainted; and
stubborn audacity is the last refuge of guilt.' See <i>ante</i>, ii. 126.</p>

<p>[861] <i>Taxation no Tyranny</i>. See <i>post</i>, under March 21, 1775.</p>

<p>[862] See <i>ante</i>, p. 265.</p>

<p>[863] In Tickell's <i>Epistle from the Hon. Charles Fox to the Hon. John
Townshend</i> (1779) are the following lines (p. 11):—</p>

<p>'Soon as to Brooks's thence thy footsteps bend,<br/>

What gratulations thy approach attend!<br/>
</p>

<p>See Beauclerk's cheek a tinge of red surprise,<br/>

And friendship give what cruel health denies.'<br/>
</p>

<p>[864] It should be recollected, that this fanciful description of his
friend was given by Johnson after he himself had become a water-drinker.
BOSWELL. Johnson, <i>post</i>, April 18, 1775, describes one of his friends
as <i>muddy</i>. On April 12, 1776, in a discussion about wine, when Reynolds
said to him, 'You have sat by, quite sober, and felt an envy of the
happiness of those who were drinking,' he replied, 'Perhaps, contempt.'
On April 28, 1778, he said to Reynolds: 'I won't argue any more with
you, Sir. You are too far gone.' See also <i>ante</i>, i. 313, note 3, where
he said to him: 'Sir, I did not count your glasses of wine, why should
you number up my cups of tea?'</p>

<p>[865] See them in <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>, 3rd edit. p. 337
[Oct. 17]. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[866] He now sent me a Latin inscription for my historical picture of
Mary Queen of Scots, and afterwards favoured me with an English
translation. Mr. Alderman Boydell, that eminent Patron of the Arts, has
subjoined them to the engraving from my picture.</p>

<p>  'Maria Scotorum Regina<br/>

   Homimun seditiosorum<br/>

   Contumeliis lassata,<br/>

Minis territa, clamoribus victa<br/>

     Libello, per quem<br/>

       Regno cedit,<br/>

   Lacrimans trepidansque<br/>

      Nomen apponit?'<br/>
</p>

<p>    'Mary Queen of Scots,<br/>

Harassed, terrified, and overpowered<br/>

    By the insults, menaces,<br/>

       And clamours<br/>

    Of her rebellious subjects,<br/>

        Sets her hand,<br/>

     With tears and confusion,<br/>

  To a resignation of the kingdom.'<br/>
</p>

<h5>BOSWELL.</h5>

<p>Northcote (<i>Life of Reynolds</i>, ii. 234) calls Boydell 'the truest and
greatest encourager of English art that England ever saw.'</p>

<p>[867] By the Boston Port-Bill, passed in 1774, Boston had been closed as
a port for the landing and shipping of goods. <i>Ann. Reg</i>. xvii. 64.</p>

<p>[868] Becket, a bookseller in the Strand, was the publisher of <i>Ossian</i>.</p>

<p>[869] His Lordship, notwithstanding his resolution, did commit his
sentiments to paper, and in one of his notes affixed to his <i>Collection
of Old Scottish Poetry</i>, he says, that 'to doubt the authenticity of
those poems is a refinement in Scepticism indeed.' J. BLAKEWAY.</p>

<p>[870] Mr. Croker writes (Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 378, note):—'The
original draft of these verses in Johnson's autograph is now before me.
He had first written:—</p>

<p>'Sunt pro legitimis pectora pura sacris;'</p>

<p>he then wrote—</p>

<p>'Legitimas faciunt pura labella preces;'</p>

<p>which more nearly approaches Mr. Boswell's version, and alludes, happily
I think, to the prayers having been read by the young lady…. The line
as it stands in the <i>Works</i> [Sint pro legitimis pura labella sacris, i.
167], is substituted in Mr. Langton's hand…. As I have reason to
believe that Mr. Langton assisted in editing these Latin <i>poemata</i>, I
conclude that these alterations were his own.'</p>

<p>[871] The learned and worthy Dr. Lawrence, whom Dr. Johnson respected
and loved as his physician and friend. BOSWELL. 'Dr. Lawrence was
descended, as Sir Egerton Brydges informs me, from Milton's friend
['Lawrence, of virtuous father virtuous son.' Milton's <i>Sonnets</i>, xx.].
One of his sons was Sir Soulden Lawrence, one of the Judges of the
King's Bench.' Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 734. See <i>post</i>, March 19, 1782.</p>

<p>[872] My friend has, in this letter, relied upon my testimony, with a
confidence, of which the ground has escaped my recollection. BOSWELL.
Lord Shelburne said: 'Like the generality of Scotch, Lord Mansfield had
no regard to truth whatever.' Fitzmaurice's <i>Shelburne</i>, i. 89.</p>

<p>[873] Dr. Lawrence. See Johnson's letter to Warren Hastings of Dec. 20,
1774. <i>Post</i>, beginning of 1781.</p>

<p>[874] I have deposited it in the British Museum. BOSWELL. Mr. P.
Cunningham says:—'Of all the MSS. which Boswell says he had deposited
in the British Museum, only the copy of the letter to Lord Chesterfield
has been found, and that was not deposited by him, but after his death,
"pursuant to the intentions of the late James Boswell, Esq."' Croker's
<i>Boswell</i>, p. 430. The original letter to Macpherson was sold in Mr.
Pocock's collection in 1875. It fetched £50, almost five times as much
as Johnson was paid for his <i>London</i>. It differs from the copy, if we
can trust the auctioneer's catalogue, where the following passage is
quoted:—'Mr. James Macpherson, I received your foolish and impudent
note. Whatever insult is offered me, I will do my best to repel, and
what I cannot do for myself the law shall do for me. I will not desist
from detecting what I think a cheat from any fear of the menaces of
a Ruffian.'</p>

<p>[875] In the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for 1773, p. 192, is announced: '<i>The Iliad of
Homer</i>. Translated by James Macpherson, Esq., 2 vols. 4to. £2 2s.
Becket.' Hume writes:—'Finding the style of his <i>Ossian</i> admired by
some, he attempts a translation of <i>Homer</i> in the very same style. He
begins and finishes in six weeks a work that was for ever to eclipse the
translation of Pope, whom he does not even deign to mention in his
preface; but this joke was still more unsuccessful [than his <i>History of
Britain</i>].' J. H. Burton's <i>Hume</i>, i. 478. Hume says of him, that he had
'scarce ever known a man more perverse and unamiable.' <i>Ib</i> p. 470.</p>

<p>[876] 'Within a few feet of Johnson lies (by one of those singular
coincidences in which the Abbey abounds) his deadly enemy, James
Macpherson.' Stanley's <i>Westminster Abbey</i>, p. 298.</p>

<p>[877] <i>Hamlet</i>, act iii. sc. I.</p>

<p>[878] 'Fear was indeed a sensation to which Dr. Johnson was an utter
stranger, excepting when some sudden apprehensions seized him that he
was going to die.' Piozzi's <i>Anec</i>. p. 277. In this respect his
character might be likened to that of Fearing, in <i>Pilgrim's Progress</i>
(Part ii), as described by Great-Heart:—'When he came to the Hill
Difficulty, he made no stick at that, nor did he much fear the Lions;
for you must know that his troubles were not about such things as these;
his fear was about his acceptance at last.'</p>

<p>[879] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 18, 1773.</p>

<p>[880] See <i>ante</i>, i. 249, where Garrick humorously foretold the
Round-house for Johnson.</p>

<p>[881] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 95.</p>

<p>[882] 'It was,' writes Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 491), 'an oak-plant of a
tremendous size; a plant, I say, and not a shoot or branch, for it had
had a root which, being trimmed to the size of a large orange, became
the head of it. Its height was upwards of six feet, and from about an
inch in diameter at the lower end, increased to near three; this he kept
in his bed-chamber, so near the chair in which he constantly sat as to
be within reach.' Macpherson, like Johnson, was a big man. Dr. A.
Carlyle says (<i>Auto</i>. p. 398):—'He was good-looking, of a large size,
with very thick legs, to hide which he generally wore boots, though not
then the fashion. He appeared to me proud and reserved.'</p>

<p>[883] Boswell wrote to Temple on April 4:—'Mr. Johnson has allowed me
to write out a supplement to his Journey.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 186.
On May 10 he wrote:—'I have not written out another line of my remarks
on the Hebrides. I found it impossible to do it in London. Besides, Dr.
Johnson does not seem very desirous that I should publish any
supplement. <i>Between ourselves, he is not apt to encourage one to share
reputation with himself</i>.' <i>Ib</i> p. 192.</p>

<p>[884] Colonel Newcome, when a lad, 'was for ever talking of India, and
the famous deeds of Clive and Lawrence. His favourite book was a history
of India—the history of Orme.' Thackeray's <i>Newcomes</i>, ch. 76. See
<i>post</i>, April 15, 1778.</p>

<p>[885] <i>Richard II</i>, act i. sc. 3. See <i>ante</i>, i. 129.</p>

<p>[886] A passage in the <i>North Briton</i>, No. 34, shews how wide-spread
this prejudice was. The writer gives his 'real, fair, and substantial
objections to the administration of this <i>Scot</i> [Lord Bute]. The first
is, that he is a <i>Scot</i>. I am certain that reason could never believe
that a <i>Scot</i> was fit to have the management of <i>English</i> affairs. A
<i>Scot</i> hath no more right to preferment in England than a <i>Hanoverian</i>
or a <i>Hottentot</i>.' In <i>Humphry Clinker</i> (Letter of July 13) we
read:—'From Doncaster northwards all the windows of all the inns are
scrawled with doggrel rhymes in abuse of the Scotch nation.' Horace
Walpole, writing of the contest between the House of Commons and the
city in 1771, says of the Scotch courtiers:—'The Scotch wanted to come
to blows, and <i>were at least not sorry to see the House of Commons so
contemptible</i>.' <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George III</i>, iv. 301. 'What a
nation is Scotland,' he wrote at the end of the Gordon Riots, 'in every
reign engendering traitors to the State, and false and pernicious to the
kings that favour it the most.' <i>Letters</i>, vii. 400. See <i>post</i>, March
21, 1783. Lord Shelburne, a man of a liberal mind, wrote:—'I can scarce
conceive a Scotchman capable of liberality, and capable of
impartiality.' After calling them 'a sad set of innate cold-hearted,
impudent rogues,' he continues:—'It's a melancholy thing that there is
no finding any other people that will take pains, or be amenable even to
the best purposes.' Fitzmaurice's <i>Shelburne</i>, iii. 441. Hume wrote to
his countryman, Gilbert Elliot, in 1764:—'I do not believe there is one
Englishman in fifty, who, if he heard I had broke (sic) my neck
to-night, would be sorry. Some, because I am not a Whig; some, because I
am not a Christian; and all, because I am a Scotsman. Can you seriously
talk of my continuing an Englishman? Am I, or are you, an Englishman?'
Elliot replies:—'Notwithstanding all you say, we are both Englishmen;
that is, true British subjects, entitled to every emolument and
advantage that our happy constitution can bestow.' Burton's <i>Hume</i>, ii.
238, 240. Hume, in his prejudice against England, went far beyond
Johnson in his prejudice against Scotland. In 1769 he wrote:—'I am
delighted to see the daily and hourly progress of madness and folly and
wickedness in England. The consummation of these qualities are the true
ingredients for making a fine narrative in history, especially if
followed by some signal and ruinous convulsion—as I hope will soon be
the case with that pernicious people.' <i>Ib</i> p. 431. In 1770 he
wrote:—'Our government has become a chimera, and is too perfect, in
point of liberty, for so rude a beast as an Englishman; who is a man, a
bad animal too, corrupted by above a century of licentiousness.' <i>Ib</i>
p. 434.</p>

<p>[887] 'The love of planting,' wrote Sir Walter Scott, 'which has become
almost a passion, is much to be ascribed to Johnson's sarcasms.' Croker
<i>Corres</i>. ii. 34. Lord Jeffrey wrote from Watford in 1833:—'What a
country this old England is. In a circle of twenty miles from this spot
(leaving out London and its suburbs), there is more old timber … than
in all Scotland.' Cockburn's <i>Jeffrey</i>, i. 348. See <i>post</i>, March
21, 1775.</p>

<p>[888] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 20.</p>

<p>[889] Even David Hume subscribed to the fund. He wrote in
1760:—'Certain it is that these poems are in every body's mouth in the
Highlands, have been handed down from father to son, and are of an age
beyond all memory and tradition. Adam Smith told me that the Piper of
the Argyleshire militia repeated to him all those which Mr. Macpherson
had translated. We have set about a subscription of a guinea or two
guineas apiece, in order to enable Mr. Macpherson to undertake a mission
into the Highlands to recover this poem, and other fragments of
antiquity.' Mason's <i>Gray</i>, ii. 170. Hume changed his opinion. 'On going
to London,' writes Dr. A. Carlyle (<i>Auto</i>. p. 276), 'he went over to the
other side, and loudly affirmed the poems to be inventions of
Macpherson. I happened to say one day, when he was declaiming against
Macpherson, that I had met with nobody of his opinion but William Caddel
of Cockenzie, and President Dundas, which he took ill, and was some time
of forgetting.' Gibbon, in the <i>Decline and Fall</i> (vol. i. ch. 6),
quoted Ossian, but added:—'Something of a doubtful mist still hangs
over these Highland traditions; nor can it be entirely dispelled by the
most ingenious researches of modern criticism.' On this Hume wrote to
him on March 18, 1776:—'I see you entertain a great doubt with regard
to the authenticity of the poems of Ossian…. Where a supposition is so
contrary to common sense, any positive evidence of it ought never to be
regarded. Men run with great avidity to give their evidence in favour of
what flatters their passions and their national prejudices. You are
therefore over and above indulgent to us in speaking of the matter with
hesitation.' Gibbon's <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 225. So early as 1763 Hume had
asked Dr. Blair for 'proof that these poems were not forged within these
five years by James Macpherson. <i>These proofs must not be arguments, but
testimonies</i>!' J. H. Burton's <i>Hume</i>, i. 466. Smollett, it should seem,
believed in Ossian to the end. In Humphry Clinker, in the letter dated
Sept. 3, he makes one of his characters write:—'The poems of Ossian are
in every mouth. A famous antiquarian of this country, the laird of
Macfarlane, at whose house we dined, can repeat them all in the original
Gaelic.' See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Nov. 10.</p>

<p>[890] I find in his letters only Sir A. Macdonald (<i>ante</i>, ii. 157) of
whom this can be said.</p>

<p>[891] See <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>, 3rd ed. p. 520 [p. 431].
BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[892] For the letter, see the end of Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>.</p>

<p>[893] <i>Fossilist</i> is not in Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>.</p>

<p>[894] 'Rasay has little that can detain a traveller, except the laird
and his family; but their power wants no auxiliaries. Such a seat of
hospitality amidst the winds and waters fills the imagination with a
delightful contrariety of images.' <i>Works</i>, ix. 62.</p>

<p>[895] Page 103. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[896] From Skye he wrote:—'The hospitality of this remote region is
like that of the golden age. We have found ourselves treated at every
house as if we came to confer a benefit.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 155.</p>

<p>[897] See <i>ante</i>, i. 443, note 2.</p>

<p>[898] I observed with much regret, while the first edition of this work
was passing through the press (Aug. 1790), that this ingenious gentleman
was dead. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[899] See <i>ante</i>, p. 242.</p>

<p>[900] See <i>ante</i>, i. 187.</p>

<p>[901] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 121, 296, and <i>post</i>, under March 30, 1783.</p>

<p>[902] Johnson (<i>Works</i>, ix. 158) says that 'the mediocrity of knowledge'
obtained in the Scotch universities, 'countenanced in general by a
national combination so invidious that their friends cannot defend it,
and actuated in particulars by a spirit of enterprise so vigorous that
their enemies are constrained to praise it, enables them to find, or to
make their way, to employment, riches, and distinction.'</p>

<p>[903] Macpherson had great influence with the newspapers. Horace Walpole
wrote in February, 1776:—'Macpherson, the Ossianite, had a pension of
£600 a year from the Court, to supervise the newspapers.' In Dec. 1781,
Walpole mentions the difficulty of getting 'a vindicatory paragraph'
inserted in the papers, 'This was one of the great grievances of the
time. Macpherson had a pension of £800 a year from Court for inspecting
newspapers, and inserted what lies he pleased, and prevented whatever he
disapproved of being printed.' <i>Journal of the Reign of George III</i>,
ii. 17, 483.</p>

<p>[904] This book was published in 1779 under the title of '<i>Remarks on
Dr. Samuel Johnson's Journey to the Hebrides</i>, by the Rev. Donald
M'Nicol, A.M., Minister of Lismore, Argyleshire.' In 1817 it was
reprinted at Glasgow together with Johnson's <i>Journey</i>, in one volume.
The <i>Remarks</i> are a few pages shorter than the <i>Journey</i>. By 'another
Scotchman,' Boswell certainly meant Macpherson.</p>

<p>[905] From a list in his hand-writing. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[906] 'Such is the laxity of Highland conversation that the inquirer is
kept in continual suspense, and by a kind of intellectual
retrogradation, knows less as he hears more.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, ix. 47.
'The Highlanders are not much accustomed to be interrogated by others,
and seem never to have thought upon interrogating themselves; so that,
if they do not know what they tell to be true, they likewise do not
distinctly perceive it to be false.' <i>Ib</i> 114.</p>

<p>[907] Of his <i>Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland</i>. BOSWELL. It
was sold at five shillings a copy. It did not reach a second edition
till 1785, when perhaps a fresh demand for it was caused by the
publication of Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>. Boswell, in a note, <i>post</i>, April
28, 1778, says that 4000 copies were sold very quickly. Hannah More
(<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 39) says that Cadell told her that he had sold 4000
copies the first week. This, I think, must be an exaggeration. A German
translation was brought out this same year.</p>

<p>[908] Boswell, on the way to London, wrote to Temple:—'I have continual
schemes of publication, but cannot fix. I am still very unhappy with my
father. We are so totally different that a good understanding is
scarcely possible. He looks on my going to London just now as an
<i>expedition</i>, as idle and extravagant, when in reality it is highly
improving to me, considering the company which I enjoy.' <i>Letters of
Boswell</i>, p. 182.</p>

<p>[909] See <i>post</i>, under March 22, 1776.</p>

<p>[910] See <i>ante</i>, p. 292.</p>

<p>[911] 'A Scotchman must be a very sturdy moralist who does not love
Scotland better than truth; he will always love it better than inquiry;
and if falsehood flatters his vanity, will not be very diligent to
detect it.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, ix. 116.</p>

<p>[912] At Slanes Castle in Aberdeenshire he wrote:—'I had now travelled
two hundred miles in Scotland, and seen only one tree not younger than
myself.' <i>Works</i>, ix. 17. Goldsmith wrote from Edinburgh on Sept. 26,
1753:—'Every part of the country presents the same dismal landscape. No
grove, nor brook lend their music to cheer the stranger, or make the
inhabitants forget their poverty.' Forsters <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 433.</p>

<p>[913] This, like his pamphlet on <i>Falkland's Islands</i>, was published
without his name.</p>

<p>[914] See Appendix.</p>

<p>[915] Convicts were sent to nine of the American settlements. According
to one estimate about 2,000 had been for many years sent annually. 'Dr.
Lang, after comparing different estimates, concludes that the number
sent might be about 50,000 altogether.' <i>Penny Cyclo</i>. xxv. 138. X.</p>

<p>[916] This 'clear and settled opinion' must have been formed in three
days, and between Grantham and London. For from that Lincolnshire town
he had written to Temple on March 18:—'As to American affairs, I have
really not studied the subject; it is too much for me perhaps, or I am
too indolent or frivolous. From the smattering which newspapers have
given me, I have been of different minds several times. That I am a
Tory, a lover of power in monarchy, and a discourager of much liberty in
the people, I avow; but it is not clear to me that our colonies are
completely our subjects.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 180. Four years later
he wrote to Temple:—'I must candidly tell you that I think you should
not puzzle yourself with political speculations more than I do; neither
of us is fit for that sort of mental labour.' <i>Ib</i> 243. See <i>post</i>,
Sept. 23, 1777, for a contest between Johnson and Boswell on
this subject.</p>

<p>[917] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 134.</p>

<p>[918] Johnson's <i>Works</i>, vi. 261.</p>

<p>[919] Four years earlier he had also attacked him. <i>Ante</i>, ii. 134, note
4.</p>

<p>[920] Lord Camden, formerly Chief Justice Pratt. See <i>ante</i>, ii. 72,
note 3; and <i>post</i>, April 14, 1775.</p>

<p>[921] 'Our people,' wrote Franklin in 1751 (<i>Memoirs</i>, vi. 3, 10), 'must
at least be doubled every twenty years.' The population he reckoned at
upwards of one million. Johnson referred to this rule also in the
following passage:—'We are told that the continent of North America
contains three millions, not of men merely, but of whigs, of whigs
fierce for liberty and disdainful of dominion; that they multiply with
the fecundity of their own rattlesnakes, so that every quarter of a
century doubles their number.' <i>Works</i>, vi. 227. Burke, in his <i>Speech
of Concilitation with America</i>, a fortnight after Johnson's pamphlet
appeared, said, 'your children do not grow faster from infancy to
manhood than they spread from families to communities, and from villages
to nations.' Payne's <i>Burke</i>, i. 169.</p>

<p>[922] Dr. T. Campbell records on April 20, 1775 (<i>Diary</i>, p. 74), that
'Johnson said the first thing he would do would be to quarter the army
on the cities, and if any refused free quarters, he would pull down that
person's house, if it was joined to other houses; but would burn it if
it stood alone. This and other schemes he proposed in the manuscript of
<i>Taxation no Tyranny</i>, but these, he said, the Ministry expunged. See
<i>post</i>, April 15, 1778, where, talking of the Americans, Johnson
exclaimed, 'he'd burn and destroy them.' On June 11, 1781, Campbell
records (<i>ib</i>. p. 88) that Johnson said to him:—'Had we treated the
Americans as we ought, and as they deserved, we should have at once
razed all their towns and let them enjoy their forests.' Campbell justly
describes this talk as 'wild rant.'</p>

<p>[923]</p>

<p>'He errs who deems obedience to a prince<br/>

Slav'ry—a happier freedom never reigns<br/>

Than with a pious monarch.'<br/>

<i>Stit</i>. iii. 113. CROKER.<br/>
</p>

<p>This volume was published in 1776. The copy in the library of Pembroke<br/>

College, Oxford, bears the inscription in Johnson's hand: 'To Sir Joshua<br/>

Reynolds from the Authour.' On the title-page Sir Joshua has written<br/>

his own name.<br/>
</p>

<p>[924] R. B. Sheridan thought of joining in these attacks. In his <i>Life</i>
by Moore (i. 151) fragments of his projected answer are given. He
intended to attack Johnson on the side of his pension. One thought he
varies three times. 'Such pamphlets,' he writes, 'will be as trifling
and insincere as the venal quit-rent of a birth-day ode.' This again
appears as 'The easy quit-rent of refined panegyric,' and yet again as
'The miserable quit-rent of an annual pamphlet.'</p>

<p>[925] See <i>post</i>, beginning of 1781.</p>

<p>[926] Boswell wrote to Temple on June 19, 1775:—'Yesterday I met Mr.
Hume at Lord Kame's. They joined in attacking Dr. Johnson to an absurd
pitch. Mr. Hume said he would give me half-a-crown for every page of his
<i>Dictionary</i> in which he could not find an absurdity, if I would give
him half-a-crown for every page in which he did not find one: he talked
so insolently really, that I calmly determined to be at him; so I
repeated, by way of telling that Dr. Johnson <i>could</i> be touched, the
admirable passage in your letter, how the Ministry had set him to write
in a way that they "could not ask even their infidel pensioner Hume to
write." When Hume asked if it was from an American, I said No, it was
from an English gentleman. "Would a <i>gentleman</i> write so?" said he. In
short, Davy was finely punished for his treatment of my revered friend;
and he deserved it richly, both for his petulance to so great a
character and for his talking so before me.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p.
204. Hume's pension was £400. He obtained it through Lord Hertford, the
English ambassador in Paris, under whom he had served as secretary to
the embassy. J. H. Burton's <i>Hume</i>, ii. 289.</p>

<p>[927] See <i>post</i>, Aug. 24 1782.</p>

<p>[928] Dr. T. Campbell records on March 16 of this year (<i>Diary</i>, p.
36):—'Thrale asked Dr. Johnson what Sir Joshua Reynolds said of
<i>Taxation no Tyranny</i>. "Sir Joshua," quoth the Doctor, "has not read
it." "I suppose," quoth Thrale, "he has been very busy of late." "No,"
says the Doctor, "but I never look at his pictures, so he won't read my
writings." He asked Johnson if he had got Miss Reynold's opinion, for
she, it seems, is a politician. "As to that," quoth the Doctor, "it is
no great matter, for she could not tell after she had read it on which
said of the question Mr. Burke's speech was."'</p>

<p>[929] W.G. Hamilton.</p>

<p>[930] See <i>post</i>, Nov. 19, 1783.</p>

<p>[931] Sixteen days after this pamphlet was published, Lord North, as
Chancellor of the University of Oxford, proposed that the degree of
Doctor in Civil Law should be conferred on Johnson (<i>post</i>, p. 331).
Perhaps the Chancellor in this was cheaply rewarding the service that
had been done to the Minister. See <i>ante</i>, ii. 373.</p>

<p>[932] Johnson's <i>Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland</i>, ed. 1785,
p. 256. [Johnson's <i>Works</i>, ix. 108.] BOSWELL. See <i>ante</i>, ii. 10,
note 3.</p>

<p>[933] He had written to Temple six days earlier:—'Second sight pleases
my superstition which, you know, is not small, and being not of the
gloomy but the grand species, is an enjoyment; and I go further than Mr.
Johnson, for the facts which I heard convinced me.' <i>Letters of
Boswell</i>, p. 179. When ten years later he published his <i>Tour</i>, he said
(Nov. 10, 1773) that he had returned from the Hebrides with a
considerable degree of faith; 'but,' he added, 'since that time my
belief in those stories has been much weakened.'</p>

<p>[934] This doubt has been much agitated on both sides, I think without
good reason. See Addison's _Freeholder, May 4, 1714. <i>The Freeholder</i>
was published from Dec. 1715 to June 1716. In the number for May 4 there
is no mention of <i>The Tale of a Tub</i>; <i>An Apology for the Tale of a Tub</i>
(Swift's <i>Works</i>, ed. 1803, iii. 20);—Dr. Hawkesworth's Preface to
Swift's <i>Works</i>, and Swift's Letter to Tooke the Printer, and Tooke's
Answer, in that collection;—Sheridan's <i>Life of Swift</i>;—Mr.
Courtenay's note on p. 3 of his <i>Poetical Review of the Literary and
Moral Character of Dr. Johnson</i>; and Mr. Cooksey's <i>Essay on the Life
and Character of John Lord Somers, Baron of Evesham</i>.</p>

<p>Dr. Johnson here speaks only to the <i>internal evidence</i>. I take leave to
differ from him, having a very high estimation of the powers of Dr.
Swift. His <i>Sentiments of a Church-of-England-man</i>, his <i>Sermon on the
Trinity</i>, and other serious pieces, prove his learning as well as his
acuteness in logick and metaphysicks; and his various compositions of a
different cast exhibit not only wit, humour, and ridicule; but a
knowledge 'of nature, and art, and life:' a combination therefore of
those powers, when (as the <i>Apology</i> says,) 'the authour was young, his
invention at the heighth, and his reading fresh in his head,' might
surely produce <i>The Tale of a Tub</i>. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[935] 'His <i>Tale of a Tub</i> has little resemblance to his other pieces.
It exhibits a vehemence and rapidity of mind, a copiousness of images
and vivacity of diction such as he afterwards never possessed, or never
exerted. It is of a mode so distinct and peculiar that it must be
considered by itself; what is true of that is not true of anything else
which he has written.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, viii. 220. At the conclusion
of the <i>Life of Swift</i> (<i>ib</i>. 228), Johnson allows him one great
merit:—'It was said in a preface to one of the Irish editions that
Swift had never been known to take a single thought from any writer,
ancient or modern. This is not literally true; but perhaps no writer can
easily be found that has borrowed so little, or that in all his
excellencies and all his defects has so well maintained his claim to be
considered as original.' See <i>ante</i>, i. 452.</p>

<p>[936] Johnson in his <i>Dictionary</i>, under the article <i>shave</i>, quotes
Swift in one example, and in the next <i>Gulliver's Travels</i>, not
admitting, it should seem, that Swift had written that book.</p>

<p>[937] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 26, 1773. David Hume wrote of
Home's <i>Agis</i>:—'I own, though I could perceive fine strokes in that
tragedy, I never could in general bring myself to like it: the author, I
thought, had corrupted his taste by the imitation of Shakespeare, whom
he ought only to have admired.' J.H. Burton's <i>Hume</i>, i. 392. About
<i>Douglas</i> he wrote:—'I am persuaded it will be esteemed the best, and
by French critics the only tragedy of our language.' <i>Ib</i> ii. 17. Hume
perhaps admired it the more as it was written, to use his own words, 'by
a namesake of mine.' <i>Ib</i> i. 316. <i>Home</i> is pronounced <i>Hume</i>. He often
wrote of his friend as 'Mr. John Hume, <i>alias</i> Home.' A few days before
his death he added the following codicil to his will:—'I leave to my
friend Mr. John Home, of Kilduff, ten dozen of my old claret at his
choice; and one single bottle of that other liquor called port. I also
leave to him six dozen of port, provided that he attests, under his
hand, signed John <i>Hume</i>, that he has himself alone finished that bottle
at two sittings. By this concession he will at once terminate the only
two differences that ever arose between us concerning temporal matters.'
<i>Ib</i> ii. 506. Sir Walter Scott wrote in his <i>Diary</i> in 1827:—'I
finished the review of John Home's works, which, after all, are poorer
than I thought them. Good blank verse, and stately sentiment, but
something luke-warmish, excepting <i>Douglas</i>, which is certainly a
masterpiece. Even that does not stand the closet. Its merits are for the
stage; and it is certainly one of the best acting plays going.'
Lockhart's <i>Scott</i>, ix. 100.</p>

<p>[938] Sheridan, says Mr. S. Whyte (<i>Miscellanea Nova</i>, p. 45), brought
out <i>Douglas</i> at the Dublin Theatre. The first two nights it had great
success. The third night was as usual to be the author's. It had
meanwhile got abroad that he was a clergyman. This play was considered a
profanation, a faction was raised, and the third night did not pay its
expenses. It was Whyte who suggested that, by way of consolation,
Sheridan should give Home a gold medal. The inscription said that he
presented it to him 'for having enriched the stage with a perfect
tragedy.' Whyte took the medal to London. When he was close at his
journey's end, 'I was,' he writes, 'stopped by highwaymen, and preserved
the medal by the sacrifice of my purse at the imminent peril of
my life.'</p>

<p>[939]</p>

<p>'No merit now the dear Nonjuror claims,<br/>

Molière's old stubble in a moment flames.'<br/>
</p>

<p>The <i>Nonjuror</i> was 'a comedy thrashed out of Molière's <i>Tartuffe</i>.' <i>The<br/>

Dunciad</i>, i. 253.<br/>
</p>

<p>[940] See <i>post</i>, June 9, 1784; also Macaulay's <i>England</i>, ch. xiv. (ed.
1874, v. 94), for remarks on what Johnson here says.</p>

<p>[941] See <i>ante</i>, i. 318, where his name is spelt <i>Madden</i>.</p>

<p>[942] This was not merely a cursory remark; for in his <i>Life of Fenton</i>
he observes, 'With many other wise and virtuous men, who at that time of
discord and debate (about the beginning of this century) consulted
conscience [whether] well or ill informed, more than interest, he
doubted the legality of the government; and refusing to qualify himself
for publick employment, by taking the oaths [by the oaths] required,
left the University without a degree.' This conduct Johnson calls
'perverseness of integrity.' [Johnson's <i>Works</i>, viii. 54.</p>

<p>The question concerning the morality of taking oaths, of whatever kind,
imposed by the prevailing power at the time, rather than to be excluded
from all consequence, or even any considerable usefulness in society,
has been agitated with all the acuteness of casuistry. It is related,
that he who devised the oath of abjuration, profligately boasted, that
he had framed a test which should 'damn one half of the nation, and
starve the other.' Upon minds not exalted to inflexible rectitude, or
minds in which zeal for a party is predominant to excess, taking that
oath against conviction may have been palliated under the plea of
necessity, or ventured upon in heat, as upon the whole producing more
good than evil.</p>

<p>At a county election in Scotland, many years ago, when there was a warm
contest between the friends of the Hanoverian succession, and those
against it, the oath of abjuration having been demanded, the freeholders
upon one side rose to go away. Upon which a very sanguine gentleman, one
of their number, ran to the door to stop them, calling out with much
earnestness, 'Stay, stay, my friends, and let us swear the rogues out of
it!' BOSWELL. Johnson, writing of the oaths required under the Militia
Bill of 1756, says:—'The frequent imposition of oaths has almost ruined
the morals of this unhappy nation, and of a nation without morals it is
of small importance who shall be king.' <i>Lit. Mag</i>. 1756, i. 59.</p>

<p>[943] Dr. Harwood sent me the following extract from the book containing
the proceedings of the corporation of Lichfield: '19th July, 1712.
Agreed that Mr. Michael Johnson be, and he is hereby elected a
magistrate and brother of their incorporation; a day is given him to
Thursday next to take the oath of fidelity and allegiance, and the oath
of a magistrate. Signed, &amp;c.'—'25th July, 1712. Mr. Johnson took the
oath of allegiance and that he believed there was no transubstantiation
in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper before, &amp;c.'—CROKER.</p>

<p>[944] A parody on <i>Macbeth</i>, act ii. sc. 2.</p>

<p>[945] Lord Southampton asked Bishop Watson of Llandaff 'how he was to
bring up his son so as to make him get forwards in the world. "I know of
but one way," replied the Bishop; "give him parts and poverty." "Well
then," replied Lord S., "if God has given him parts, I will manage as to
the poverty."' H. C. Robinson's <i>Diary</i>, i. 337. Lord Eldon said that
Thurlow promised to give him a post worth about £160 a year, but he
never did. 'In after life,' said Eldon, 'I inquired of him why he had
not fulfilled his promise. His answer was curious:—"It would have been
your ruin. Young men are very apt to be content when they get something
to live upon; so when I saw what you were made of, I determined to break
my promise to make you work;" and I dare say he was right, for there is
nothing does a young lawyer so much good as to be half starved.' Twiss's
<i>Eldon</i>, i. 134.</p>

<p>[946] In New Street, near Gough Square, in Fleet Street, whither in
February 1770 the King's printinghouse was removed from what is still
called Printing House Square. CROKER. Dr. Spottiswoode, the late
President of the Royal Society, was the great-grandson of Mr. Strahan.</p>

<p>[947] See <i>post</i>, under March 30, 1783.</p>

<p>[948] Johnson wrote to Dr. Taylor on April 8 of this year:—'I have
placed young Davenport in the greatest printing house in London, and
hear no complaint of him but want of size, which will not hinder him
much. He may when he is a journeyman always get a guinea a week.' <i>Notes
and Queries</i>, 6th S., v. 422. Mr. Jewitt in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for Dec.
1878, gives an account of this lad. He was the orphan son of a
clergyman, a friend of the Rev. W. Langley, Master of Ashbourne School
(see <i>post</i>, Sept. 14, 1777). Mr. Langley asked Johnson's help 'in
procuring him a place in some eminent printing office.' Davenport wrote
to Mr. Langley nearly eight years later:—'According to your desire, I
consulted Dr. Johnson about my future employment in life, and he very
laconically told me "to work hard at my trade, as others had done before
me." I told him my size and want of strength prevented me from getting
so much money as other men. "Then," replied he, "you must get as much as
you can."' The boy was nearly sixteen when he was apprenticed, and had
learnt enough Latin to quote Virgil, so that there was nothing in
Johnson's speech beyond his understanding.</p>

<p>[949] Seven years afterwards, Johnson described this evening. Miss
Monckton had told him that he must see Mrs. Siddons. 'Well, Madam,' he
answered, 'if you desire it, I will go. See her I shall not, nor hear
her; but I'll go, and that will do. The last time I was at a play, I was
ordered there by Mrs. Abington, or Mrs. Somebody, I do not well remember
who; but I placed myself in the middle of the first row of the front
boxes, to show that when I was called I came.' Mme. D' Arblay's <i>Diary</i>,
ii. 199. At Fontainebleau he went—to a comedy (<i>post</i>, Oct. 19, 1775),
so that it was not 'the last time he was at a play.'</p>

<p>[950] 'One evening in the oratorio season of 1771,' writes Mrs. Piozzi
(Anec. 72), 'Mr. Johnson went with me to Covent Garden theatre. He sat
surprisingly quiet, and I flattered myself that he was listening to the
music. When we were got home he repeated these verses, which he said he
had made at the oratorio:—</p>

<p>"In Theatre, March 8, 1771.<br/>

Tertii verso quater orbe lustri,<br/>

Quid theatrales tibi, Crispe, pompae?<br/>

Quam decet canos male literates<br/>

Sera voluptas!<br/>

Tene mulceri fidibus canoris?<br/>

Tene cantorum modulis stupere?<br/>

Tene per pictas, oculo elegante,<br/>

Currere formas?<br/>

Inter aequales, sine felle liber,<br/>

Codices veri studiosus inter<br/>

Rectius vives. Sua quisque carpal<br/>

Gaudia gratus.<br/>

Lusibus gaudet puer otiosis,<br/>

Luxus oblectat juvenem theatri,<br/>

At seni fluxo sapienter uti<br/>

Tempore restat."'<br/>
</p>

<p>(<i>Works</i>, i. 166.)</p>

<p>[951] <i>Bon Ton, or High Life above Stairs</i>, by Garrick. He made King the
comedian a present of this farce, and it was acted for the first time on
his benefit-a little earlier in the month. Murphy's <i>Garrick</i>, pp.
330, 332</p>

<p>[952] 'August, 1778. An epilogue of Mr. Garrick's to <i>Bonduca</i> was
mentioned, and Dr. Johnson said it was a miserable performance:—"I
don't know," he said, "what is the matter with David; I am afraid he is
grown superannuated, for his prologues and epilogues used to be
incomparable."' Mme. D'Arblay's <i>Diary</i>, i. 64.</p>

<p>[953] 'Scottish brethren and architects, who had bought Durham Yard, and
erected a large pile of buildings under the affected name of the
Adelphi. These men, of great taste in their profession, were attached
particularly to Lord Bute and Lord Mansfield, and thus by public and
private nationality zealous politicians.' Walpole's <i>Memoirs of the
Reign of George III</i>. iv. 173. Hume wrote to Adam Smith in June 1772, at
a time where there was 'a universal loss of credit':—'Of all the
sufferers, I am the most concerned for the Adams. But their undertakings
were so vast, that nothing could support them. They must dismiss 3000
workmen, who, comprehending the materials, must have expended above
£100,000 a year. To me the scheme of the Adelphi always appeared so
imprudent, that my wonder is how they could have gone on so long.' J. H.
Burton's <i>Hume</i>, ii, 460. Garrick lived in the Adelphi.</p>

<p>[954] 'Man looks aloft, and with erected eyes, Beholds his own
hereditary skies.' DRYDEN, Ovid, <i>Meta</i>. i. 85.</p>

<p>[955] Hannah More (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 213) says that she was made 'the umpire
in a trial of skill between Garrick and Boswell, which could most nearly
imitate Dr. Johnson's manner. I remember I gave it for Boswell in
familiar conversation, and for Garrick in reciting poetry.'</p>

<p>[956] 'Gesticular mimicry and buffoonery Johnson hated, and would often
huff Garrick for exercising it his presence.' Hawkins's <i>Johnson</i>,
p. 386.</p>

<p>[957] In the first two editions Johnson is represented as only saying,
'Davy is futile.'</p>

<p>[958] My noble friend Lord Pembroke said once to me at Wilton, with a
happy pleasantry and some truth, that 'Dr. Johnson's sayings would not
appear so extraordinary, were it not for his <i>bow-wow way</i>.' The sayings
themselves are generally of sterling merit; but, doubtless, his <i>manner</i>
was an addition to their effect; and therefore should be attended to as
much as may be. It is necessary however, to guard those who were not
acquainted with him, against overcharged imitations or caricatures of
his manner, which are frequently attempted, and many of which are
second-hand copies from the late Mr. Henderson the actor, who, though
a good mimick of some persons, did not represent Johnson correctly.
BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[959] See '<i>Prosodia Rationalis</i>; or, an Essay towards establishing the
Melody and Measure of Speech, to be expressed and perpetuated by
peculiar Symbols.' London, 1779. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[960] I use the phrase <i>in score</i>, as Dr. Johnson has explained it in
his <i>Dictionary</i>:—'A <i>song in</i> SCORE, the words with the musical notes
of a song annexed.' But I understand that in scientific property it
means all the parts of a musical composition noted down in the
characters by which it is established to the eye of the skillful.
BOSWELL. It was <i>declamation</i> that Steele pretended to reduce to
notation by new characters. This he called the <i>melody</i> of speech, not
the harmony, which is the term in <i>score</i> implies. BURNEY.</p>

<p>[961] Johnson, in his <i>Life of Gray</i> (<i>Works</i>, viii. 481), spoke better
of him. 'What has occurred to me from the slight inspection of his
<i>Letters</i>, in which my understanding has engaged me, is, that his mind
had a large gap; that his curiosity was unlimited, and his judgment
cultivated.' Horace Walpole (<i>Letters</i>, ii 128) allowed that he was bad
company. 'Sept. 3, 1748. I agree with you most absolutely in your
opinion about Gray; he is the worst company in the world. From a
melancholy turn, from living reclusely, and from a little too much
dignity, he never converses easily; all his words are measured and
chosen, his writings are admirable; he himself is not agreeable.'</p>

<p>[962] In the original, 'Give ample room and verge enough.' In the <i>Life
of Gray</i> (<i>Works</i>, vii. 486) Johnson says that the slaughtered bards
'are called upon to "Weave the warp, and weave the woof," perhaps with
no great propriety; for it is by crossing the <i>woof</i> with the <i>warp</i>
that men weave the <i>web</i> or piece; and the first line was dearly bought
by the admission of its wretched correspondent, "Give ample room and
verge enough." He has, however, no other line as bad.' See <i>ante</i>,
i. 402.</p>

<p>[963] This word, which is in the first edition, is not in the second or
third.</p>

<p>[964] '<i>The Church-yard</i> abounds with images which find a mirror in
every mind, and with sentiments to which every bosom returns an echo.
The four stanzas, beginning "Yet even these bones," are to me original.
I have never seen the notions in any other place; yet he that reads them
here persuades himself that he has always felt them. Had Gray written
often thus, it had been vain to blame, and useless to praise him.'
<i>Works</i>, viii. 487. Goldsmith, in his <i>Life of Parnell</i> (<i>Misc. Works</i>,
iv. 25), thus seems to sneer at <i>The Elegy</i>:—'The <i>Night Piece</i> on
death deserves every praise, and, I should suppose, with very little
amendment, might be made to surpass all those night pieces and
<i>church-yard scenes</i> that have since appeared.'</p>

<p>[965] Mr. Croker says, 'no doubt Lady Susan Fox who, in 1773, married
Mr. William O'Brien, an actor.' It was in 1764 that she was married, so
that it is not likely that she was the subject of this talk. See Horace
Valpole's <i>Letters</i>, iv. 221.</p>

<p>[966] Mrs. Thrale's marriage with Mr. Piozzi.</p>

<p>[967] See <i>ante</i>, i. 408.</p>

<p>[968] Boswell was of the same way of thinking as Squire Western, who
'did indeed consider a parity of fortune and circumstances to be
physically as necessary an ingredient in marriage as difference of
sexes, or any other essential; and had no more apprehension of his
daughter falling in love with a poor man than with any animal of a
different species.' <i>Tom Jones</i>, bk. vi. ch. 9.</p>

<p>[969]</p>

<p>'Temptanda via est, qua me quoque possim<br/>

Tollere humo victorque virum volitare per ora.'<br/>

'New ways I must attempt, my grovelling name<br/>

To raise aloft, and wing my flight to fame.'<br/>
</p>

<p>DRYDEN, Virgil, <i>Georg</i>. iii. 9. 'Chesterfield was at once the most
distinguished orator in the Upper House, and the undisputed sovereign of
wit and fashion. He held this eminence for about forty years. At last it
became the regular custom of the higher circles to laugh whenever he
opened his mouth, without waiting for his <i>bon mot</i>. He used to sit at
White's, with a circle of young men of rank around him, applauding every
syllable that he uttered.' Macaulay's <i>Life</i>, i. 325.</p>

<p>[970] With the Literary Club, as is shewn by Boswell's letter of April
4, 1775, in which he says:—'I dine on Friday at the Turk's Head,
Gerrard Street, with our Club, who now dine once a month, and sup every
Friday.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 186. The meeting of Friday, March 24,
is described <i>ante</i>, p. 318, and that of April 7, <i>post</i>, p. 345.</p>

<p>[971] Very likely Boswell (<i>ante</i>, ii. 84, note 3).</p>

<p>[972] In the <i>Garrick Corres</i>. (ii. 141) is a letter dated March 4,
1776, from (to use Garrick's own words) 'that worst of bad women, Mrs.
Abington, to ask my playing for her benefit.' It is endorsed by
Garrick:—'A copy of Mother Abington's Letter about leaving the stage.'</p>

<p>[973] Twenty years earlier he had recommended to Miss Boothby as a
remedy for indigestion dried orange-peel finely powdered, taken in a
glass of hot red port. 'I would not,' he adds, 'have you offer it to the
Doctor as my medicine. Physicians do not love intruders.' <i>Piozzi
Letters</i>, ii. 397. See <i>post</i>, April 18, 1783.</p>

<p>[974] The misprint of <i>Chancellor</i> for <i>Gentlemen</i> is found in both the
second and third editions. It is not in the first.</p>

<p>[975] Extracted from the Convocation Register, Oxford. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[976] The original is in my possession. He shewed me the Diploma, and
allowed me to read it, but would not consent to my taking a copy of it,
fearing perhaps that I should blaze it abroad in his life-time. His
objection to this appears from his 99th letter to Mrs. Thrale, whom in
that letter he thus scolds for the grossness of her flattery of
him:—'The other Oxford news is, that they have sent me a degree of
Doctor of Laws, with such praises in the Diploma as perhaps ought to
make me ashamed: they are very like your praises. I wonder whether I
shall ever shew it [<i>them</i> in the original] to you.'</p>

<p>It is remarkable that he never, so far as I know, assumed his title of
<i>Doctor</i>, but called himself <i>Mr</i>. Johnson, as appears from many of his
cards or notes to myself; and I have seen many from him to other
persons, in which he uniformly takes that designation. I once observed
on his table a letter directed to him with the addition of <i>Esquire</i>,
and objected to it as being a designation inferiour to that of Doctor;
but he checked me, and seemed pleased with it, because, as I
conjectured, he liked to be sometimes taken out of the class of literary
men, and to be merely <i>genteel,—un gentilhomme comme un autre</i>.
Boswell. See post, March 30, 1781, where Johnson applies the title to
himself in speaking, and April 13, 1784, where he does in writing, and
Boswell's Hebrides, Aug. 15, 1773, note.</p>

<p>[977] 'To make a man pleased with himself, let me tell you, is doing a
very great thing.' <i>Post</i>, April 28, 1778.</p>

<p>[978] 'The original is in the hands of Dr. Forthergril, then
Vice-Chancellor, who made this transcript.' T. WARTON—BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[979] Bruce, the Abyssinian traveller, as is shewn by <i>Piozzi Letters</i>,
i. 213.</p>

<p>[980] 'That the design [of the <i>Dunciad</i>] was moral, whatever the author
might tell either his readers or himself, I am not convinced. The first
motive was the desire of revenging the contempt with which Theobald had
treated his <i>Shakespeare</i> and regaining the honour which he had lost, by
crushing his opponent.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, viii. 338.</p>

<p>[981]</p>

<p>'Daughter of Chaos and old Night,<br/>

Cimmerian Muse, all hail!<br/>

That wrapt in never-twinkling gloom canst write,<br/>

And shadowest meaning with thy dusky veil!<br/>

What Poet sings and strikes the strings?<br/>

It was the mighty Theban spoke.<br/>

He from the ever-living lyre<br/>

With magic hand elicits fire.<br/>

Heard ye the din of modern rhymers bray?<br/>

It was cool M-n; or warm G-y,<br/>

Involv'd in tenfold smoke.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Colman's <i>Prose on Several Occasions</i>, ii. 273.</p>

<p>[982] 'These <i>Odes</i>,' writes Colman, 'were a piece of boys' play with my
schoolfellow Lloyd, with whom they were written in concert.' <i>Ib</i> i. xi.
In the <i>Connoisseur</i> (<i>ante</i>, i. 420) they had also written in concert.
'Their humour and their talents were well adapted to what they had
undertaken; and Beaumont and Fletcher present what is probably the only
parallel instance of literary co-operation so complete, that the
portions written by the respective parties are undistinguishable.'
Southey's <i>Cowper</i>, i. 47.</p>

<p>[983] <i>Ante</i>, i. 402.</p>

<p>[984] Boswell writing to Temple two days later, recalled the time 'when
you and I sat up all night at Cambridge and read Gray with a noble
enthusiasm; when we first used to read Mason's <i>Elfrida</i>, and when we
talked of that elegant knot of worthies, Gray, Mason, Walpole, &amp;c.'
<i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 185.</p>

<p>[985] 'I have heard Mr. Johnson relate how he used to sit in some
coffee-house at Oxford, and turn M——'s <i>C-r-ct-u-s</i> into ridicule for
the diversion of himself and of chance comers-in. "The <i>Elf—da</i>," says
he, "was too exquisitely pretty; I could make no fun out of that."'
Piozzi's <i>Anec</i>. p. 37. I doubt whether Johnson used the word <i>fun</i>,
which he describes in his <i>Dictionary</i> as 'a low cant [slang] word.'</p>

<p>[986] See <i>post</i>, March 26, 1779, and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 1, and
under Nov. 11, 1773. According to Dr. T. Campbell (<i>Diary</i>, p. 36),
Johnson, on March 16, had said that <i>Taxation no Tyranny</i> did not sell.</p>

<p>[987] Six days later he wrote to Dr. Taylor:—'The patriots pelt me with
answers. Four pamphlets, I think, already, besides newspapers and
reviews, have been discharged against me. I have tried to read two of
them, but did not go through them.' <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S., v. 422.</p>

<p>[988] 'Mrs. Macaulay,' says Mr. Croker, who quotes Johnson's <i>Works</i>,
vi. 258, where she is described as 'a female patriot bewailing the
miseries of her friends and fellow-citizens.' See <i>ante</i>, i. 447.</p>

<p>[989] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 24, 1773, and <i>post</i>, Sept. 24,
1777, for another landlord's account of Johnson.</p>

<p>[990] From Dryden's lines on Milton.</p>

<p>[991] Horace Walpole wrote, on Jan. 15, 1775 (<i>Letters</i>, vi.
171):—'They [the Millers] hold a Parnassus-fair every Thursday, give
out rhymes and themes, and all the flux of quality at Bath contend for
the prizes. A Roman Vase, dressed with pink ribands and myrtles,
receives the poetry, which is drawn out every festival: six judges of
these Olympic games retire and select the brightest compositions, which
the respective successful acknowledge, kneel to Mrs. Calliope Miller,
kiss her fair hand, and are crowned by it with myrtle, with—I don't
know what.'</p>

<p>[992] Miss Burney wrote, in 1780:—'Do you know now that,
notwithstanding Bath-Easton is so much laughed at in London, nothing
here is more tonish than to visit Lady Miller. She is a round, plump,
coarse-looking dame of about forty, and while all her aim is to appear
an elegant woman of fashion, all her success is to seem an ordinary
woman in very common life, with fine clothes on.' Mme. D'Arblay's
<i>Diary</i>, i. 364.</p>

<p>[993] 'Yes, on my faith, there are <i>bouts-rimés</i> on a buttered muffin,
made by her Grace the Duchess of Northumberland.' Walpole's <i>Letters</i>,
vi. 171. 'She was,' Walpole writes, 'a jovial heap of contradictions.
She was familiar with the mob, while stifled with diamonds; and yet was
attentive to the most minute privileges of her rank, while almost
shaking hands with a cobbler.' <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George III</i>, i.
419. Dr. Percy showed her Goldsmith's ballad of <i>Edwin and Angelina</i> in
MS., and she had a few copies privately printed. Forster's
<i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 379.</p>

<p>[994] Perhaps Mr. Seward, who was something of a literary man, and who
visited Bath (<i>post</i>, under March 30, 1783).</p>

<p>[995]</p>

<p>'—rerum
Fluctibus in mediis et tempestatibus urbis.'</p>

<p>Horace, <i>Epistles</i>, ii. 2. 84. See <i>ante</i>, i. 461.</p>

<p>[996]</p>

<p>'Qui semel adspexit quantum dimissa petitis<br/>

Præstent, mature redeat repetatque relicta.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Horace, <i>Epistles</i>, i. 7. 96.</p>

<p>'To his first state let him return with speed,<br/>

Who sees how far the joys he left exceed<br/>

His present choice.' FRANCIS.<br/>
</p>

<p>Malone says that 'Walpole, after he ceased to be minister, endeavoured
to amuse his mind with reading. But one day when Mr. Welbore Ellis was
in his library, he heard him say, with tears in his eyes, after having
taken up several books and at last thrown away a folio just taken down
from a shelf, "Alas! it is all in vain; <i>I cannot read</i>."' Prior's
<i>Malone</i>, p. 379. Lord Eldon, after his retirement, said to an
inn-keeper who was thinking of giving up business:—'Believe me, for I
speak from experience, when a man who has been much occupied through
life arrives at having nothing to do, he is very apt not to know what to
do <i>with himself</i>.' Later on, he said:—'It was advice given by me in
the spirit of that Principal of Brasenose, who, when he took leave of
young men quitting college, used to say to them, "Let me give you one
piece of advice, <i>Cave de resignationibus</i>." And very good advice too.'
Twiss's <i>Eldon</i>, iii. 246.</p>

<p>[997] See <i>post</i>, April 10, 1775. He had but lately begun to visit
London. 'Such was his constant apprehension of the small-pox, that he
lived for twenty years within twenty miles of London, without visiting
it more than once.' At the age of thirty-five he was inoculated, and
henceforth was oftener in town. Campbell's <i>British Poets</i>, p. 569.</p>

<p>[998] Mr. S. Raymond, Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South
Wales, published in Sydney in 1854 the <i>Diary of a Visit to England in
1775. by an Irishman</i> (<i>The Rev. Dr. Thomas Campbell</i>,) <i>with Notes</i>.
The MS., the editor says, was discovered behind an old press in one of
the offices of his Court. The name of the writer nowhere appears in the
MS. It is clear, however, that if it is not a forgery, the author was
Campbell. In the <i>Edinburgh Review</i> for Oct., 1859, its authenticity is
examined, and is declared to be beyond a doubt. Lord Macaulay aided the
Reviewer in his investigation. <i>Ib</i> p. 323. He could scarcely, however,
have come to his task with a mind altogether free from bias, for the
editor 'has contrived,' we are told, 'to expose another of Mr. Croker's
blunders.' Faith in him cannot be wrong who proves that Croker is not in
the right. The value of this <i>Diary</i> is rated too highly by the
Reviewer. The Master of Balliol College has pointed out to me that it
adds but very little to Johnson's sayings. So far as he is concerned, we
are told scarcely anything of mark that we did not know already. This
makes the Master doubt its genuineness. I have noticed one suspicious
passage. An account is given of a dinner at Mr. Thrale's on April 1, at
which Campbell met Murphy, Boswell, and Baretti. 'Johnson's <i>bons mots</i>
were retailed in such plenty that they, like a surfeit, could not lie
upon my memory.' In one of the stories told by Murphy, Johnson is made
to say, 'Damn the rascal.' Murphy would as soon have made the Archbishop
of Canterbury swear as Johnson; much sooner the Archbishop of York. It
was Murphy 'who paid him the highest compliment that ever was paid to a
layman, by asking his pardon for repeating some oaths in the course of
telling a story' (<i>post</i>, April 12, 1776). Even supposing that at this
time he was ignorant of his character, though the supposition is a wild
one, he would at once have been set right by Boswell and the Thrales
(<i>post</i>, under March 15, 1776). It is curious, that this anecdote
imputing profanity to Johnson is not quoted by the Edinburgh reviewer.
On the whole I think that the <i>Diary</i> is genuine, and accordingly I have
quoted it more than once.</p>

<p>[999] Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 173) says that Johnson spoke of Browne as
'of all conversers the most delightful with whom he ever was in
company.' Pope's bathos, in his lines to Murray:—</p>

<p>'Graced as thou art with all the power of words,<br/>

So known, so honoured, at the House of Lords,'<br/>
</p>

<p>was happily parodied by Browne:—</p>

<p>'Persuasion tips his tongue whene'er he talks,<br/>

And he has chambers in the King's Bench Walks.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Pattison's <i>Satires of Pope</i>, pp. 57, 134. See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>,<br/>

Sept. 5.<br/>
</p>

<p>[1000] Horace Walpole says of Beckford's Bribery Bill of
1768:—'Grenville, to flatter the country gentlemen, who can ill afford
to combat with great lords, nabobs, commissaries, and West Indians,
declaimed in favour of the bill.' <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George
III</i>, iii. 159.</p>

<p>[1001] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 167, where he said much the same. Another day,
however, he agreed that a landlord ought to give leases to his tenants,
and not 'wish to keep them in a wretched dependance on his will. "It is
a man's duty," he said, "to extend comfort and security among as many
people as he can. He should not wish to have his tenants mere
<i>Ephemerae</i>—mere beings of an hour."' Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct.
10, 1773.</p>

<p>[1002] 'Thomas Hickey is now best remembered by a characteristic
portrait of his friend Tom Davies, engraved with Hickey's name to it.'
P. CUNNINGHAM.</p>

<p>[1003] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 92. In the <i>Life of Pope</i> (<i>Works</i>, viii. 302),<br/>

Johnson says that 'the shafts of satire were directed in vain against<br/>

Cibber, being repelled by his impenetrable impudence.' Pope speaks of<br/>

Gibber's 'impenetrability.' Elwin's <i>Pope</i>, ix. 231.<br/>
</p>

<p>[1004] He alludes perhaps to a note on the <i>Dunciad</i>, ii, 140, in which
it is stated that 'the author has celebrated even Cibber himself
(presuming him to be the author of the <i>Careless Husband</i>).' See <i>post</i>,
May 15, 1776, note.</p>

<p>[1005] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 32.</p>

<p>[1006] Burke told Malone that 'Hume, in compiling his <i>History</i>, did not
give himself a great deal of trouble in examining records, &amp;c.; and that
the part he most laboured at was the reign of King Charles II, for whom
he had an unaccountable partiality.' Prior's <i>Malone</i>, p. 368.</p>

<p>[1007] Yet Johnson (<i>Works</i>, vii. 177) wrote of Otway, who was nine
years old when Charles II. came to the throne, and who outlived him by
only a few weeks:—'He had what was in those times the common reward of
loyalty; he lived and died neglected.' Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 51) says that
he heard Johnson 'speak of Dr. Hodges who, in the height of the Great
Plague of 1665, continued in London, and was almost the only one of his
profession that had the courage to oppose his art to the spreading of
the contagion. It was his hard fate, a short time after, to die in
prison for debt in Ludgate. Johnson related this to us with the tears
ready to start from his eyes; and, with great energy, said, "Such a man
would not have been suffered to perish in these times."'</p>

<p>[1008] Johnson in 1742 said that William III. 'was arbitrary, insolent,
gloomy, rapacious, and brutal; that he was at all times disposed to play
the tyrant; that he had, neither in great things nor in small, the
manners of a gentleman; that he was capable of gaining money by mean
artifices, and that he only regarded his promise when it was his
interest to keep it.' <i>Works</i>, vi. 6. Nearly forty years later, in his
<i>Life of Rowe</i> (<i>ib</i>. vii. 408), he aimed a fine stroke at that King.
'The fashion of the time,' he wrote, 'was to accumulate upon Lewis all
that can raise horrour and detestation; and whatever good was withheld
from him, that it might not be thrown away, was bestowed upon King
William.' Yet in the <i>Life of Prior</i> (<i>ib</i>. viii. 4) he allowed him
great merit. 'His whole life had been action, and none ever denied him
the resplendent qualities of steady resolution and personal courage.'
See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 24, 1773.</p>

<p>[1009] 'The fact of suppressing the will is indubitably true,' wrote
Horace Walpole (<i>Letters</i>, vii. 142). 'When the news arrived of the
death of George I, my father carried the account from Lord Townshend to
the then Prince of Wales. The Council met as soon as possible. There
Archbishop Wake, with whom one copy of the will had been deposited,
advanced, and delivered the will to the King, who put it into his
pocket, and went out of Council without opening it, the Archbishop not
having courage or presence of mind to desire it to be read, as he ought
to have done. I was once talking to the late Lady Suffolk, the former
mistress, on that extraordinary event. She said, "I cannot justify the
deed to the legatees; but towards his father, the late King was
justifiable, for George I. had burnt two wills made in favour of
George II."'</p>

<p>[1010] 'Charles II. by his affability and politeness made himself the
idol of the nation, which he betrayed and sold.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>,
vi. 7.</p>

<p>[1011] 'It was maliciously circulated that George was indifferent to his
own succession, and scarcely willing to stretch out a hand to grasp the
crown within his reach.' Coxe's <i>Memoirs of Walpole</i>, i. 57.</p>

<p>[1012] Plin. <i>Epist</i>. lib. ii. ep. 3. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1013] Mr. Davies was here mistaken. Corelli never was in England.
BURNEY.</p>

<p>[1014] Mr. Croker is wrong in saying that the Irishman in Mrs. Thrale's
letter of May 16, 1776 (<i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 329), is Dr. Campbell. The
man mentioned there had never met Johnson, though she wrote more than a
year after this dinner at Davies's. She certainly quotes one of 'Dr.
C-l's phrases,' but she might also have quoted Shakspeare. I have no
doubt that Mrs. Thrale's Irishman was a Mr. Musgrave (<i>post</i>, under June
16, 1784, note), who is humorously described in Mme. D'Arblay's <i>Diary</i>,
ii. 83. Since writing this note I have seen that the Edinburgh reviewer
(Oct. 1859, p. 326) had come to the same conclusion.</p>

<p>[1015] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 26, 1773, where Johnson said that
'he did not approve of a Judge's calling himself Farmer Burnett, and
going about with a little round hat.'</p>

<p>[1016] 'If all the employments of life were crowded into the time which
it [sic] really occupied, perhaps a few weeks, days, or hours would be
sufficient for its accomplishment, so far as the mind was engaged in the
performance.' <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 8.</p>

<p>[1017] Johnson certainly did, who had a mind stored with knowledge, and
teeming with imagery: but the observation is not applicable to writers
in general. BOSWELL. See <i>post</i>, April 20, 1783.</p>

<p>[1018] See <i>ante</i>, i. 358.</p>

<p>[1019] See ante, i. 306.</p>

<p>[1020] There has probably been some mistake as to the terms of this
supposed extraordinary contract, the recital of which from hearsay
afforded Johnson so much play for his sportive acuteness. Or if it was
worded as he supposed, it is so strange that I should conclude it was a
joke. Mr. Gardner, I am assured, was a worthy and a liberal man.
BOSWELL. Thurlow, when Attorney-General, had been counsel for the
Donaldsons, in the appeal before the House of Lords on the Right of
Literary Property (<i>ante</i>, i. 437, and ii. 272). In his argument 'he
observed (exemplifying his observations by several cases) that the
booksellers had not till lately ever concerned themselves about
authors.' <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for 1774, p. 51.</p>

<p>[1021] 'The booksellers of London are denominated <i>the trade</i>' (<i>post</i>,
April 15, 1778, note).</p>

<p>[1022] <i>Bibliopole</i> is not in Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>.</p>

<p>[1023] The Literary Club. See <i>ante</i>, p. 330, note 1. Mr. Croker says
that the records of the Club show that, after the first few years,
Johnson very rarely attended, and that he and Boswell never met there
above seven or eight times. It may be observed, he adds, how very rarely
Boswell records the conversation at the club, Except in one instance
(<i>post</i>, April, 3, 1778), he says, Boswell confines his report to what
Johnson or himself may have said. That this is not strictly true is
shewn by his report of the dinner recorded above, where we find reported
remarks of Beauclerk and Gibbon. Seven meetings besides this are
mentioned by Boswell. See <i>ante</i>, ii. 240, 255, 318, 330; and <i>post</i>,
April 3, 1778, April 16, 1779, and June 22, 1784. Of all but the last
there is some report, however brief, of something said. When Johnson was
not present, Boswell would have nothing to record in this book.</p>

<p>[1024] <i>Travels through Germany, &amp;c</i>., 1756-7.</p>

<p>[1025] <i>Travels through Holland, &amp;c. Translated from the French</i>, 1743.</p>

<p>[1026] See <i>post</i>, March 24, 1776, and May 17, 1778.</p>

<p>[1027] <i>Description of the East</i>, 1743-5.</p>

<p>[1028] Johnson had made the same remark, and Boswell had mentioned
Leandro Alberti, when they were talking in an inn in the Island of Mull.
Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 14, 1773.</p>

<p>[1029] Addison does not mention where this epitaph, which has eluded a
very diligent inquiry, is found. MALONE. I have found it quoted in old
Howell. 'The Italian saying may be well applied to poor England:—"I was
well—would be better—took physic—and died."' <i>Lett</i>. Jan. 20, 1647.
CROKER. It is quoted by Addison in <i>The Spectator</i>, No. 25:—'This
letter puts me in mind of an Italian epitaph written on the monument of
a Valetudinarian: <i>Stavo ben, ma per star meglio sto qui</i>, which it is
impossible to translate.'</p>

<p>[1030] Lord Chesterfield, as Mr. Croker points out, makes the same
observation in one of his <i>Letters to his Son</i> (ii. 351). Boswell,
however, does not get it from him, for he had said the same in the
<i>Hebrides</i>, six months before the publication of Chesterfield's
<i>Letters</i>. Addison, in the preface to his <i>Remarks</i>, says:—'Before I
entered on my voyage I took care to refresh my memory among the classic
authors, and to make such collections out of them as I might afterwards
have occasion for.'</p>

<p>[1031] See ante, ii. 156.</p>

<p>[1032] 'It made an impression on the army that cannot be well imagined
by those who saw it not. The whole army, and at last all people both in
city and country were singing it perpetually, and perhaps never had so
slight a thing so great an effect.' Bumet's Own Time, ed. 1818, ii. 430.
In Tristram Shandy, vol. i. chap. 21, when Mr. Shandy advanced one of
his hypotheses:—'My uncle Toby,' we read, 'would never offer to answer
this by any other kind of argument than that of whistling half-a-dozen
bars of Lilliburlero.'</p>

<p>[1033] See ante, ii. 66.</p>

<p>[1034] 'Of Gibbon, Mackintosh neatly remarked that he might have been
cut out of a corner of Burke's mind, without his missing it.' <i>Life of
Mackintosh</i>, i. 92. It is worthy of notice that Gibbon scarcely mentions
Johnson in his writings. Moreover, in the names that he gives of the
members of the Literary Club, 'who form a large and luminous
constellation of British stars,' though he mentions eighteen of them, he
passes over Boswell. Gibbon's <i>Misc. Works</i>, i.219. See also <i>post</i>,
April 18, 1775.</p>

<p>[1035] We may compare with this Dryden's line:—</p>

<p>'Usurped a patriot's all-atoning name.'</p>

<p><i>Absalom and Achitophel</i>, l. 179. Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 506) says that 'to
party opposition Johnson ever expressed great aversion, and of the
pretences of patriots always spoke with indignation and contempt.' He
had, Hawkins adds, 'partaken of the short-lived joy that infatuated the
public' when Walpole fell; but a few days convinced him that the
patriotism of the opposition had been either hatred or ambition. For
<i>patriots</i>, see <i>ante</i>, i. 296, note, and <i>post</i>, April 6, 1781.</p>

<p>[1036] Mr. Burke. See <i>ante</i>, p. 222, note 4.</p>

<p>[1037] Lord North's ministry lasted from 1770 to 1782.</p>

<p>[1038] Perhaps Johnson had this from Davies, who says (<i>Life of
Garrick</i>, i. 124):—'Mrs. Pritchard read no more of the play of
<i>Macbeth</i> than her own part, as written out and delivered to her by the
prompter.' She played the heroine in <i>Irene</i> (<i>ante</i>, i. 197). See
<i>post</i> under Sept. 30, 1783, where Johnson says that 'in common life she
was a vulgar idiot,' and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 28, 1773.</p>

<p>[1039] A misprint for April 8.</p>

<p>[1040] Boswell calls him the 'Irish Dr. Campbell,' to distinguish him
from the Scotch Dr. Campbell mentioned <i>ante</i>, i. 417.</p>

<p>[1041] See <i>ante</i>, i. 494.</p>

<p>[1042] Baretti, in a MS. note in his copy of <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 374,
says:—'Johnson was often fond of saying silly things in strong terms,
and the silly Madam [Mrs. Thrale] never failed to echo that beastly
kind of wit.'</p>

<p>[1043] According to Dr. T. Campbell, who was present at the dinner
(<i>Diary</i>, p. 66), Barry and Garrick were the two actors, and Murphy the
author. If Murphy said this in the heat of one of his quarrels with
Garrick, he made amends in his <i>Life</i> of that actor (p. 362):—'It was
with Garrick,' he wrote, 'a fixed principle, that authors were entitled
to the emolument of their labours, and by that generous way of thinking
he held out an invitation to men of genius.'</p>

<p>[1044] Page 392, vol. i. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1045] Let me here be allowed to pay my tribute of most sincere
gratitude to the memory of that excellent person, my intimacy with whom
was the more valuable to me, because my first acquaintance with him was
unexpected and unsolicited. Soon after the publication of my <i>Account of
Corsica</i>, he did me the honour to call on me, and, approaching me with a
frank courteous air, said, 'My name, Sir, is Oglethorpe, and I wish to
be acquainted with you.' I was not a little flattered to be thus
addressed by an eminent man, of whom I had read in Pope, from my
early years,</p>

<p>'Or, driven by strong benevolence of soul, Will fly, like Oglethorpe,
from pole to pole.'</p>

<p>I was fortunate enough to be found worthy of his good opinion, insomuch,
that I not only was invited to make one in the many respectable
companies whom he entertained at his table, but had a cover at his
hospitable board every day when I happened to be disengaged; and in his
society I never failed to enjoy learned and animated conversation,
seasoned with genuine sentiments of virtue and religion. BOSWELL. See
<i>ante</i>, i. 127, and ii. 59, note 1. The couplet from Pope is from
<i>Imitations of Horace</i>, <i>Epist</i>. ii. 2. 276.</p>

<p>[1046]</p>

<p>'Hope springs eternal in the human breast:<br/>

Man never <i>is</i>, but always <i>to be</i> blest.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Essay on Man</i>, i. 95.</p>

<p>[1047] 'The natural flights of the human mind are not from pleasure to
pleasure, but from hope to hope.' <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 2. See <i>post</i>, iii.
53, and June 12, 1784. Swift defined happiness as 'a perpetual
possession of being well deceived.' <i>Tale of a Tub</i>, Sect, ix., Swift's
<i>Works</i>, ed. 1803, iii. 154.</p>

<p>[1048] See <i>post</i>, March 29, 1776.</p>

<p>[1049] The General seemed unwilling to enter upon it at this time; but
upon a subsequent occasion he communicated to me a number of
particulars, which I have committed to writing; but I was not
sufficiently diligent in obtaining more from him, not apprehending that
his friends were so soon to lose him; for, notwithstanding his great
age, he was very healthy and vigorous, and was at last carried off by a
violent fever, which is often fatal at any period of life. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1050] See <i>ante</i>, p. 338.</p>

<p>[1051]</p>

<p>'Mediocribus esse poetis<br/>

 <i>Non homines, non Di</i>, non concessere columnae.'<br/>

'But God and man, and letter'd post denies<br/>

 That poets ever are of middling size.'<br/>
</p>

<p>FRANCIS, Horace, <i>Ars Poet</i>. l. 372.</p>

<p>[1052] Why he failed to keep his journal may be guessed from his letter
to Temple:—'I am,' he wrote on April 17, 'indeed enjoying this
metropolis to the full, according to my taste, except that I cannot, I
see, have a plenary indulgence from you for Asiatic multiplicity. Be not
afraid of me, except when I take too much claret; and then indeed there
is a <i>furor brevis</i> as dangerous as anger…. I have rather had too much
dissipation since I came last to town. I try to keep a journal, and
shall show you that I have done tolerably: but it is hardly credible
what ground I go over, and what a variety of men and manners I
contemplate in a day; and all the time I myself am <i>pars magna</i>, for my
exuberant spirits will not let me listen enough.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>,
pp. 187-9.</p>

<p>[1053] Johnson, in <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 110, published on Easter Eve,
1751, thus justifies fasting:—'Austerity is the proper antidote to
indulgence; the diseases of mind as well as body are cured by
contraries, and to contraries we should readily have recourse if we
dreaded guilt as we dread pain.'</p>

<p>[1054] From this too just observation there are some eminent exceptions,
BOSWELL. 'Dr. Johnson said:—"Few bishops are now made for their
learning. To be a bishop, a man must be learned in a learned age,
factious in a factious age, but always of eminence."' Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 21, 1773.</p>

<p>[1055] Lord Shelburne wrote of him:—'He panted for the Treasury, having
a notion that the King and he understood it from what they had read
about revenue and funds while they were at Kew.' Fitzmaurice's
<i>Shelburne</i>, i. 141.</p>

<p>[1056] Chief Justice Pratt (afterwards Lord Camden) became popular by
his conduct as a judge in Wilkes's case. In 1764 he received the freedom
of the guild of merchants in Dublin in a gold box, and from Exeter the
freedom of the city. The city of London gave him its freedom in a gold
box, and had his portrait painted by Reynolds. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. 1764, pp.
44, 96, 144. See <i>ante</i>, p. 314.</p>

<p>[1057] The King, on March 3, 1761, recommended this measure to
Parliament. <i>Parl. Hist</i>. xv. 1007. 'This,' writes Horace Walpole, 'was
one of Lord Bute's strokes of pedantry. The tenure of the judges had
formerly been a popular topic; and had been secured, as far as was
necessary. He thought this trifling addition would be popular now, when
nobody thought or cared about it.' <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George
III</i>, i. 41.</p>

<p>[1058] The money arising from the property of the prizes taken before
the declaration of war, which were given to his Majesty by the peace of
Paris, and amounted to upwards of £700,000, and from the lands in the
ceded islands, which were estimated at £200,000 more. Surely there was a
noble munificence in this gift from a Monarch to his people. And let it
be remembered, that during the Earl of Bute's administration, the King
was graciously pleased to give up the hereditary revenues of the Crown,
and to accept, instead of them, of the limited sum of £800,000 a year;
upon which Blackstone observes, that 'The hereditary revenues, being put
under the same management as the other branches of the publick
patrimony, will produce more, and be better collected than heretofore;
and the publick is a gainer of upwards of £100,000 <i>per annum</i> by this
disinterested bounty of his Majesty.' Book I. Chap. viii. p. 330.
BOSWELL. Lord Bolingbroke (<i>Works</i>, iii. 286), about the year 1734,
pointed out that 'if the funds appropriated produce the double of that
immense revenue of £800,000 a year, which hath been so liberally given
the King for life, the whole is his without account; but if they fail in
any degree to produce it, the entire national fund is engaged to make up
the difference.' Blackstone (edit, of 1778, i. 331) says:—'£800,000
being found insufficient, was increased in 1777 to, £900,000.' He adds,
'the public is still a gainer of near £100,000.'</p>

<p>[1059] See <i>post</i>, iii. 163.</p>

<p>[1060] Lord Eldon says that Dundas, 'in broken phrases,' asked the King
to confer a baronetcy on 'an eminent Scotch apothecary who had got from
Scotland the degree of M. D. The King said:—"What, what, is that all?
It shall be done. I was afraid you meant to ask me to make the Scotch
apothecary a physician—that's more difficult."' He added:—'They may
make as many Scotch apothecaries Baronets as they please, but I shall
die by the College.' Twiss's <i>Eldon</i>, ii. 354. A Dr. Duncan, says Mr.
Croker, was appointed physician to the King in 1760. Croker's <i>Boswell</i>,
p. 448. A doctor of the same name, and no doubt the same man, was made a
baronet in Aug. 1764. Jesse's <i>Selwyn</i>, i. 287.</p>

<p>[1061] Wedderburne, afterwards Lord Chancellor Loughborough, and Earl of
Rosslyn. One of his 'errands' had been to bring Johnson bills in payment
of his first quarter's pension. <i>Ante</i>, i. 376.</p>

<p>[1062] Home, the author of <i>Douglas</i>. Boswell says that 'Home showed the
Lord Chief Baron Orde a pair of pumps he had on, and desired his
lordship to observe how well they were made, telling him at the same
time that they had been made for Lord Bute, but were rather too little
for him, so his lordship had made John a present of them. "I think,"
said the Lord Chief Baron, "you have taken the measure of Lord Bute's
foot."' <i>Boswelliana</i>, p. 252. Dr. A. Carlyle (<i>Auto</i>. p. 335),
writes:—'With Robertson and Home in London I passed the time very
agreeably; for though Home was now [1758] entirely at the command of
Lord Bute, whose nod made him break every engagement—for it was not
given above an hour or two before dinner—yet, as he was sometimes at
liberty when the noble lord was to dine abroad, like a horse loosened
from his stake, he was more sportful than usual.'</p>

<p>[1063] Lord North was merely the King's agent. The King was really his
own minister at this time, though he had no seat in his own
cabinet councils.</p>

<p>[1064] Only thirty-four years earlier, on the motion in the Lords for
the removal of Walpole, the Duke of Argyle said:—'If my father or
brother took upon him the office of a sole minister, I would oppose it
as inconsistent with the constitution, as a high crime and misdemeanour.
I appeal to your consciences whether he [Walpole] hath not done this…
He hath turned out men lately for differing with him.' Lord Chancellor
Hardwicke replied:—'A sole minister is so illegal an office that it is
none. Yet a noble lord says, <i>Superior respondeat</i>, which is laying down
a rule for a prime minister; whereas the noble Duke was against any.'
<i>The Secker MS. Parl. Hist</i>. xi. 1056-7. In the Protest against the
rejection of the motion it was stated:—'We are persuaded that a sole,
or even a first minister, is an officer unknown to the law of Britain,'
&amp;c. <i>Ib</i> p. 1215. Johnson reports the Chancellor as saying:—'It has not
been yet pretended that he assumes the title of <i>prime minister</i>, or,
indeed, that it is applied to him by any but his enemies … The first
minister can, in my opinion, be nothing more than a formidable illusion,
which, when one man thinks he has seen it, he shows to another, as
easily frighted as himself,' &amp;c. Johnson's <i>Works</i>, x. 214-15. In his
<i>Dictionary</i>, <i>premier</i> is only given as an adjective, and <i>prime
minister</i> is not given at all. When the Marquis of Rockingham was
forming his cabinet in March 1782, Burke wrote to him:—'Stand firm on
your ground—but <i>one</i> ministry. I trust and hope that your lordship
will not let <i>one</i>, even but <i>one</i> branch of the state … out of your
own hands; or those which you can entirely rely on.' Burke's <i>Corres</i>.
ii. 462. See also <i>post</i>, iii. 46, April 1, 1781, Jan. 20, 1782, and
April 10, 1783.</p>

<p>[1065] See <i>ante</i>, p. 300.</p>

<p>[1066] 'As he liberally confessed that all his own disappointments
proceeded from himself, he hated to hear others complain of general
injustice.' Piozzi's <i>Anec</i>. p. 251. See <i>post</i>, end of May, 1781, and
March 23, 1783.</p>

<p>[1067] 'Boswell and I went to church, but came very late. We then took
tea, by Boswell's desire; and I eat one bun, I think, that I might not
seem to fast ostentatiously.' <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 138.</p>

<p>[1068] See ante, i. 433.</p>

<p>[1069] See ante, i. 332.</p>

<p>[1070] The following passages shew that the thought, or something like
it, was not new to Johnson:—'Bruyère declares that we are come into the
world too late to produce anything new, that nature and life are
preoccupied, and that description and sentiment have been long
exhausted.' <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 143. 'Some advantage the ancients might
gain merely by priority, which put them in possession of the most
natural sentiments, and left us nothing but servile repetition or forced
conceits.' <i>Ib</i> No. 169. 'My earlier predecessors had the whole field of
life before them, untrodden and unsurveyed; characters of every kind
shot up in their way, and those of the most luxuriant growth, or most
conspicuous colours, were naturally cropt by the first sickle. They that
follow are forced to peep into neglected corners.' <i>The Idler</i>, No. 3.
'The first writers took possession of the most striking objects for
description, and the most probable occurrences for fiction.' <i>Rasselas</i>,
ch. x. Some years later he wrote:—'Whatever can happen to man has
happened so often that little remains for fancy or invention.' <i>Works</i>,
vii. 311. See also <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 86. In <i>The Adventurer</i>, No. 95,
he wrote:—'The complaint that all topicks are preoccupied is nothing
more than the murmur of ignorance or idleness.' See <i>post</i>, under Aug.
29, 1783. Dr. Warton (<i>Essay on Pope</i>, i. 88) says that 'St. Jerome
relates that Donatus, explaining that passage in Terence, <i>Nihil est
dictum quod non sit dictum prius</i>, railed at the ancients for taking
from him his best thoughts. <i>Pereant qui ante nos nostra dixerunt</i>.'</p>

<p>[1071] Warburton, in the Dedication of his <i>Divine Legation</i> to the
Free-thinkers (vol. I. p. ii), says:—'Nothing, I believe, strikes the
serious observer with more surprize, in this age of novelties, than that
strange propensity to infidelity, so visible in men of almost every
condition: amongst whom the advocates of Deism are received with all the
applauses due to the inventers of the arts of life, or the deliverers of
oppressed and injured nations.' See <i>ante</i>, ii. 81.</p>

<p>[1072] In <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 89, Johnson writes of 'that interchange of
thoughts which is practised in free and easy conversation, where
suspicion is banished by experience, and emulation by benevolence; where
every man speaks with no other restraint than unwillingness to offend,
and hears with no other disposition than desire to be pleased.' In <i>The
Idler</i>, No. 34, he says 'that companion will be oftenest welcome whose
talk flows out with inoffensive copiousness and unenvied insipidity.' He
wrote to Mrs. Thrale:—'Such tattle as filled your last sweet letter
prevents one great inconvenience of absence, that of returning home a
stranger and an inquirer. The variations of life consist of little
things. Important innovations are soon heard, and easily understood. Men
that meet to talk of physicks or metaphysicks, or law or history, may be
immediately acquainted. We look at each other in silence, only for want
of petty talk upon slight occurrences.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 354.</p>

<p>[1073] <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 138. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1074] This line is not, as appears, a quotation, but an abstract of p.
139 of <i>Pr. and Med</i>.</p>

<p>[1075] This is a proverbial sentence. 'Hell,' says Herbert, 'is full of
good meanings and wishings.' <i>Jacula Prudentum</i>, p. 11, edit
1651. MALONE.</p>

<p>[1076] Boswell wrote to Temple:—'I have only to tell you, as my divine,
that I yesterday received the holy sacrament in St. Paul's Church, and
was exalted in piety.' It was in the same letter that he mentioned
'Asiatic multiplicity' (<i>ante</i> p. 352, note 1). <i>Letters of Boswell</i>,
p. 189.</p>

<p>[1077]</p>

<p>'Nil admirari, prope res est una, Numici,<br/>

Solaque, quae possit facere et servare beatum'<br/>
</p>

<p>Horace, <i>Epis</i>. i. 6. 1.</p>

<p>'Not to admire is all the art I know,<br/>

To make men happy and keep them so'<br/>
</p>

<p>Pope's <i>Imitations</i>, adapted from Creech.</p>

<p>[1078]</p>

<p>'We live by Admiration, Hope, and Love;<br/>

And even as these are well and wisely fixed,<br/>

In dignity of being we ascend.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Wordsworth's <i>Works</i>, ed. 1857, vi. 135.</p>

<p>[1079]</p>

<p>'Amoret's as sweet and good,<br/>

As the most delicious food;<br/>

Which but tasted does impart<br/>

Life and gladness to the heart.<br/>

Sacharissa's beauty's wine,<br/>

Which to madness does incline;<br/>

Such a liquor as no brain<br/>

That is mortal can sustain.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Waller's <i>Epistles</i>, xii. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1080] Not that he would have wished Boswell 'to talk from books.' 'You
and I,' he once said to him, 'do not talk from books.' Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, Nov. 3, 1773. See <i>post</i>, iii, 108, note 1, for Boswell's
want of learning.</p>

<p>[1081] See <i>post</i>, under March 30, 1783.</p>

<p>[1082] Yet he sat to Miss Reynolds, as he tells us, perhaps ten times
(<i>post</i>, under June 17, 1783), and 'Miss Reynolds's mind,' he said, 'was
very near to purity itself.' Northcote's <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 80. Eight years
later Barry, in his <i>Analysis</i> (<i>post</i>, May, 1783, note), said:—'Our
females are totally, shamefully, and cruelly neglected in the
appropriation of trades and employments.' Barry's <i>Works</i>, ii. 333.</p>

<p>[1083] The four most likely to be mentioned would be, I think,
Beauclerk, Garrick, Langton, and Reynolds. On p. 359, Boswell mentions
Beauclerk's 'acid manner.'</p>

<p>[1084] In his <i>Dictionary</i>, Johnson defines <i>muddy</i> as <i>cloudy in mind,
dull</i>; and quotes <i>The Winter's Tale</i>, act i. sc. 2. Wesley (<i>Journal</i>,
ii. 10) writes:—'Honest, <i>muddy</i> M. B. conducted me to his house.'
Johnson (<i>post</i>, March 22, 1776), after telling how an acquaintance of
his drank, adds, 'not that he gets drunk, for he is a very pious man,
but he is always <i>muddy</i>.' It seems at first sight unlikely that he
called Reynolds <i>muddy</i>; yet three months earlier he had
written:—'Reynolds has taken too much to strong liquor.' <i>Ante</i>, p.
292, note 5.</p>

<p>[1085] In <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 72, Johnson defines good-humour as 'a habit
of being pleased; a constant and perennial softness of manner, easiness
of approach, and suavity of disposition.'</p>

<p>[1086] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 17, 1773.</p>

<p>[1087] 'It is with their learning as with provisions in a besieged town,
every one has a mouthful, and no one a bellyful.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>
(1787), xi. 200.</p>

<p>[1088] 'Men bred in the Universities of Scotland cannot be expected to
be often decorated with the splendours of ornamental erudition, but they
obtain a mediocrity of knowledge between learning and ignorance, not
inadequate to the purposes of common life, which is, I believe, very
widely diffused among them.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, ix. 158. Lord Shelburne
said that the Earl of Bute had 'a great deal of superficial knowledge,
such as is commonly to be met with in France and Scotland, chiefly upon
matters of natural philosophy, mines, fossils, a smattering of
mechanics, a little metaphysics, and a very false taste in everything.'
Fitzmaurice's <i>Shelburne</i>, i. 139. 'A gentleman who had heard that
Bentley was born in the north, said to Porson: "Wasn't he a Scotchman?"
"No, Sir," replied Porson, "Bentley was a great Greek scholar."'
Rogers's <i>Table Talk</i>, p. 322.</p>

<p>[1089] Walton did not retire from business till 1643. But in 1664, Dr.
King, Bishop of Chichester, in a letter prefixed to his <i>Lives</i>,
mentions his having been familiarly acquainted with him for forty years;
and in 1631 he was so intimate with Dr. Donne that he was one of the
friends who attended him on his death-bed. J. BOSWELL, jun. His first
wife's uncle was George Cranmer, the grandson of the Archbishop's
brother. His second wife was half-sister of Bishop Ken.</p>

<p>[1090] Johnson himself, as Boswell tells us, 'was somewhat susceptible
of flattery.' <i>Post</i>, end of 1784.</p>

<p>[1091] The first time he dined with me, he was shewn into my book-room,
and instantly poured over the lettering of each volume within his reach.
My collection of books is very miscellaneous, and I feared there might
be some among them that he would not like. But seeing the number of
volumes very considerable, he said, 'You are an honest man, to have
formed so great an accumulation of knowledge.' BURNEY. Miss Burney
describes this visit (<i>Memoirs of Dr. Burney</i>, ii. 93):—'Everybody rose
to do him honour; and he returned the attention with the most formal
courtesie. My father whispered to him that music was going forward,
which he would not, my father thinks, have found out; and, placing him
on the best seat vacant, told his daughters to go on with the duet,
while Dr. Johnson, intently rolling towards them one eye—for they say
he does not see with the other—made a grave nod, and gave a dignified
motion with one hand, in silent approvance of the proceeding.' He was
next introduced to Miss Burney, but 'his attention was not to be drawn
off two minutes longer from the books, to which he now strided his way.
He pored over them shelf by shelf, almost brushing them with his
eye-lashes from near examination. At last, fixing upon something that
happened to hit his fancy, he took it down, and standing aloof from the
company, which he seemed clean and clear to forget, he began very
composedly to read to himself, and as intently as if he had been alone
in his own study. We were all excessively provoked, for we were
languishing, fretting, expiring to hear him talk.' Dr. Burney, taking up
something that Mrs. Thrale had said, ventured to ask him about Bach's
concert. 'The Doctor, comprehending his drift, good-naturedly put away
his book, and see-sawing with a very humorous smile, drolly repeated,
"Bach, Sir? Bach's concert? And pray, Sir, who is Bach? Is he a piper?"'</p>

<p>[1092] Reynolds, noting down 'such qualities as Johnson's works cannot
convey,' says that 'the most distinguished was his possessing a mind
which was, as I may say, always ready for use. Most general subjects had
undoubtedly been already discussed in the course of a studious thinking
life. In this respect few men ever came better prepared into whatever
company chance might throw him; and the love which he had to society
gave him a facility in the practice of applying his knowledge of the
matter in hand, in which I believe he was never exceeded by any man.'
Taylor's <i>Reynolds</i>, ii. 454.</p>

<p>[1093] See <i>ante</i>, p. 225.</p>

<p>[1094] 'Our silly things called Histories,' wrote Burke (<i>Corres</i>, i.
337). 'The Duke of Richmond, Fox, and Burke,' said Rogers (<i>Table-Talk</i>,
p. 82), 'were conversing about history, philosophy, and poetry. The Duke
said, "I prefer history to philosophy or poetry, because history is
<i>truth</i>." Both Fox and Burke disagreed with him: they thought that
poetry was <i>truth</i>, being a representation of human nature.' Lord
Bolingbroke had said (<i>Works</i>, iii. 322) that the child 'in riper years
applies himself to history, or to that which he takes for history, to
authorised romance.'</p>

<p>[1095] Mr. Plunket made a great sensation in the House of Commons (Feb.
28, 1825) by saying that history, if not judiciously read, 'was no
better than an old almanack'—which Mercier had already said in his
<i>Nouveau Tableau de Paris</i>—'Malet du Pan's and such like histories of
the revolution are no better than an old almanack.' Boswell, we see, had
anticipated both. CROKER.</p>

<p>[1096] It was at Rome on Oct. 15, 1764, says Gibbon in a famous passage,
'that the idea of writing the decline and fall of the city first started
to my mind.' It was not till towards the end of 1772 that he 'undertook
the composition of the first volume.' Gibbon's <i>Misc. Works</i>, i.
198, 217-9.</p>

<p>[1097] See p. 348. BOSWELL. Gibbon, when with Johnson, perhaps felt that
timidity which kept him silent in Parliament. 'I was not armed by nature
and education,' he writes, 'with the intrepid energy of mind and voice
<i>Vincentem strepitus, et natum rebus agendis</i>. Timidity was fortified by
pride, and even the success of my pen discouraged the trial of my
voice.' Gibbon's <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 221. Some years before he entered
Parliament, he said that his genius was 'better qualified for the
deliberate compositions of the closet, than for the extemporary
discourses of the Parliament. An unexpected objection would disconcert
me; and as I am incapable of explaining to others what I do not
thoroughly understand myself, I should be meditating while I ought to be
answering.' <i>Ib</i> ii. 39.</p>

<p>[1098] A very eminent physician, whose discernment is as acute and
penetrating in judging of the human character as it is in his own
profession, remarked once at a club where I was, that a lively young
man, fond of pleasure, and without money, would hardly resist a
solicitation from his mistress to go upon the highway, immediately after
being present at the representation of <i>The Beggar's Opera</i>. I have been
told of an ingenious observation by Mr. Gibbon, that '<i>The Beggar's
Opera</i> may, perhaps, have sometimes increased the number of highwaymen;
but that it has had a beneficial effect in refining that class of men,
making them less ferocious, more polite, in short, more like gentlemen.'
Upon this Mr. Courtenay said, that 'Gay was the Orpheus of
highwaymen.' BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1099] 'The play like many others was plainly written only to divert
without any moral purpose, and is therefore not likely to do good; nor
can it be conceived without more speculation than life requires or
admits to be productive of much evil. Highwaymen and house-breakers
seldom frequent the play-house, or mingle in any elegant diversion; nor
is it possible for any one to imagine that he may rob with safety,
because he sees Macheath reprieved upon the stage.' <i>Works</i>, viii. 68.</p>

<p>[1100] 'The worthy Queensb'ry yet laments his Gay.'</p>

<p><i>The Seasons</i>. Summer, l. 1422. Pope (<i>Prologue to the Satires</i>, l. 259)
says:—</p>

<p>'Of all thy blameless life the sole return<br/>

My verse, and Queensb'ry weeping o'er thy urn.'<br/>
</p>

<p>Johnson (<i>Works</i>, viii. 69) mentions 'the affectionate attention of the
Duke and Duchess of Queensberry, into whose house he was taken, and with
whom he passed the remaining part of his life.' Smollett, in <i>Humphry
Clinker</i>, in the letters of Sept. 12 and 13, speaks of the Duke as 'one
of the best men that ever breathed,' 'one of those few noblemen whose
goodness of heart does honour to human nature.' He died in 1778.</p>

<p>[1101] This song is the twelfth air in act i.</p>

<p>[1102] 'In several parts of tragedy,' writes Tom Davies, 'Walker's look,
deportment, and action gave a <i>distinguished glare to tyrannic rage</i>.'
Davies's <i>Garrick</i>, i. 24.</p>

<p>[1103] Pope said of himself and Swift:—'Neither of us thought it would
succeed. We shewed it to Congreve, who said it would either take greatly
or be damned confoundedly. We were all at the first night of it in great
uncertainty of the event, till we were very much encouraged by
overhearing the Duke of Argyle say, "It will do—it must do! I see it in
the eyes of them!" This was a good while before the first act was over,
and so gave us ease soon: for that duke has a more particular knack than
any one now living in discovering the taste of the publick. He was quite
right in this, as usual: the good-nature of the audience appeared
stronger and stronger every act, and ended in a clamour of applause.'
Spence's <i>Anec</i>. p. 159. See <i>The Dundad</i>, iii. 330, and <i>post</i>,
April 25, 1778.</p>

<p>[1104] R. B. Sheridan married Miss Linley in 1773.</p>

<p>[1105] His wife had £3000, settled on her with delicate generosity by a
gentleman to whom she had been engaged. Moore's <i>Sheridan</i>, i. 43.</p>

<p>[1106] 'Those who had felt the mischief of discord and the tyranny of
usurpation read <i>Hudibras</i> with rapture, for every line brought back to
memory something known, and gratified resentment by the just censure of
something hated. But the book, which was once quoted by princes, and
which supplied conversation to all the assemblies of the gay and witty,
is now seldom mentioned, and even by those that affect to mention it, is
seldom read.' <i>The Idler</i>, No. 59.</p>

<p>[1107] In his <i>Life of Addison</i>, Johnson says (<i>Works</i>, vii. 431):—'The
reason which induced Cervantes to bring his hero to the grave, <i>para mi
solo nacio Don Quixote y yo para el</i> [for me alone was Don Quixote born,
and I for him], made Addison declare, with undue vehemence of
expression, that he would kill Sir Roger; being of opinion that they
were born for one another, and that any other hand would do him wrong.'</p>

<p>[1108] 'It may be doubted whether Addison ever filled up his original
delineation. He describes his knight as having his imagination somewhat
warped; but of this perversion he has made very little use.' Johnson's
<i>Works</i>, vii. 431.</p>

<p>[1109] 'The papers left in the closet of Pieresc supplied his heirs with
a whole winter's fuel.' <i>The Idler</i>, No. 65. 'A chamber in his house was
filled with letters from the most eminent scholars of the age. The
learned in Europe had addressed Pieresc in their difficulties, who was
hence called "the attorney-general of the republic of letters." The
niggardly niece, though entreated to permit them to be published,
preferred to use these learned epistles occasionally to light her
fires.' D'Israeli's <i>Curiosities of Literature</i>, i. 59.</p>

<p>[1110] Boswell was accompanied by Paoli. To justify his visit to London,
he said:—'I think it is also for my interest, as in time I may get
something. Lord Pembroke was very obliging to me when he was in
Scotland, and has corresponded with me since. I have hopes from him.'
<i>Letters of Boswell</i>, pp. 182, 189, and <i>post</i>, iii. 122, note 2. Horace
Walpole described Lord Pembroke in 1764 as 'a young profligate.'
<i>Memoirs of the Reign of George III</i>, i. 415.</p>

<p>[1111] Page 316. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1112] Page 291. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1113] In justice to Dr. Memis, though I was against him as an Advocate,
I must mention, that he objected to the variation very earnestly, before
the translation was printed off. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1114] Mr. Croker quotes <i>The World</i> of June 7, 1753, where a Londoner,
'to gratify the curiosity of a country friend, accompanied him in Easter
week to Bedlam. To my great surprise,' he writes, 'I found a hundred
people, at least, who, having paid their twopence apiece, were suffered
unattended to run rioting up and down the wards making sport of the
miserable inhabitants. I saw them in a loud laugh of triumph at the
ravings they had occasioned.' Young (<i>Universal Passion</i>, Sat. v.)
describes Britannia's daughters</p>

<p>'As unreserved and beauteous as the sun,<br/>

Through every sign of vanity they run;<br/>

Assemblies, parks, coarse feasts in city halls,<br/>

Lectures and trials, plays, committees, balls;<br/>

Wells, <i>Bedlams</i>, executions, Smithfield scenes,<br/>

And fortune-tellers' caves, and lions' dens.'<br/>
</p>

<p>In 1749, William Hutton walked from Nottingham to London, passed three
days there in looking about, and returned on foot. The whole journey
cost him ten shillings and eight-pence. He says:—'I wished to see a
number of curiosities, but my shallow pocket forbade. <i>One penny to see
Bedlam was all I could spare</i>.' Hutton's <i>Life</i>, pp. 71, 74. Richardson
(<i>Familiar Letters</i>, No. 153) makes a young lady describe her visit to
Bedlam:—'The distempered fancies of the miserable patients most
unaccountably provoked mirth and loud laughter; nay, so shamefully
inhuman were some, among whom (I am sorry to say it) were several of my
own sex, as to endeavour to provoke the patients into rage to make
them sport.'</p>

<p>[1115] In the <i>Life of Dryden</i> (<i>Works</i>, vii. 304), Johnson
writes:—'Virgil would have been too hasty if he had condemned him
[Statius] <i>to straw</i> for one sounding line.' In <i>Humphry Clinker</i>
(Letter of June 10), Mr. Bramble says to Clinker:—'The sooner you lose
your senses entirely the better for yourself and the community. In that
case, some charitable person might provide you with a dark room and
clean straw in Bedlam.' Churchill, in <i>Independence</i> (Poems, ii.
307), writes:—</p>

<p>'To Bethlem with him—give him whips and straw,<br/>

I'm very sensible he's mad in law.'<br/>
</p>

<p>[1116] My very honourable friend General Sir George Howard, who served
in the Duke of Cumberland's army, has assured me that the cruelties were
not imputable to his Royal Highness. BOSWELL. Horace Walpole shews the
Duke's cruelty to his own soldiers. 'In the late rebellion some recruits
had been raised under a positive engagement of dismission at the end of
three years. When the term was expired they thought themselves at
liberty, and some of them quitted the corps. The Duke ordered them to be
tried as deserters, and not having received a legal discharge, they were
condemned. Nothing could mollify him; two were executed.' <i>Memoirs of
the Reign of George II</i>, ii. 203.</p>

<p>[1117] It has been suggested that this is Dr. Percy (see <i>post</i>, April
23, 1778), but Percy was more than 'an acquaintance of ours,' he was
a friend.</p>

<p>[1118] Very likely Mr. Steevens. See <i>post</i>, April 13, 1778, and May 15,
1784.</p>

<p>[1119] On this day Johnson wrote to Mrs. Thrale:—'Boswell has made me
promise not to go to Oxford till he leaves London; I had no great reason
for haste, and therefore might as well gratify a friend. I am always
proud and pleased to have my company desired. Boswell would have thought
my absence a loss, and I know not who else would have considered my
presence as profit. He has entered himself at the Temple, and I joined
in his bond. He is to plead before the Lords, and hopes very nearly to
gain the cost of his journey. He lives much with his friend Paoli.'
<i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 216. Boswell wrote to Temple on June 6:—'For the
last fortnight that I was in London I lay at Paoli's house, and had the
command of his coach…. I felt more dignity when I had several servants
at my devotion, a large apartment, and the convenience and state of a
coach. I recollected that <i>this dignity in London</i> was honourably
acquired by my travels abroad, and my pen after I came home, so I could
enjoy it with my own approbation.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 200. A year
later he records, that henceforth, while in London, he was Paoli's
constant guest till he had a house of his own there (<i>post</i>, iii. 34).</p>

<p>[1120] Lord Stowell told Mr. Croker that, among the Scottish <i>literati</i>,
Mr. Crosbie was the only man who was disposed to <i>stand up</i> (as the
phrase is) to Johnson. Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 270. It is said that he
was the original of Mr. Counsellor Pleydell in Scott's novel of <i>Guy
Mannering</i>. Dr. A. Carlyle (<i>Autobiography</i>, p. 420) says of 'the famous
club called the Poker,' which was founded in Edinburgh in 1762:—'In a
laughing humour, Andrew Crosbie was chosen Assassin, in case any officer
of that sort should be needed; but David Hume was added as his Assessor,
without whose assent nothing should be done, so that between <i>plus</i> and
<i>minus</i> there was likely to be no bloodshed.' See Boswell's <i>Herbrides</i>,
Aug. 16, 1773.</p>

<p>[1121] He left on the 22nd. 'Boswell,' wrote Johnson to Mrs. Thrale on
May 22, 'went away at two this morning. He got two and forty guineas in
fees while he was here. He has, by his wife's persuasion and mine, taken
down a present for his mother-in-law.' [? Step-mother, with whom he was
always on bad terms; <i>post</i>, iii. 95, note 1.] <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 219.
Boswell, the evening of the same day, wrote to Temple from Grantham:—'I
have now eat (sic) a Term's Commons in the Inner Temple. You cannot
imagine what satisfaction I had in the form and ceremony of the
<i>Hall</i>…. After breakfasting with Paoli, and worshipping at St. Paul's,
I dined tête-à-tête with my charming Mrs. Stuart. We talked with
unreserved freedom, as we had nothing to fear; we were <i>philosophical</i>,
upon honour—not deep, but feeling; we were pious; we drank tea, and bid
each other adieu as finely as romance paints. She is my wife's dearest
friend; so you see how beautiful our intimacy is. I then went to Mr.
Johnson's, and he accompanied me to Dilly's, where we supped; and then
he went with me to the inn in Holborn, where the Newcastle Fly sets out;
we were warmly affectionate. He is to buy for me a chest of books, of
his choosing, off stalls, and I am to read more and drink less; that was
his counsel.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 196.</p>

<p>[1122] Yet Gilbert Walmsley had called him in his youth 'a good
scholar.' <i>Garrick Corres</i>. i. 1; and Boswell wrote to him:—'Mr.
Johnson is ready to bruise any one who calls in question your classical
knowledge, and your happy application of it.' <i>Ib</i> p. 622.</p>

<p>[1123] 'Those whose lot it is to ramble can seldom write, and those who
know how to write very seldom ramble.' Johnson to Mrs. Thrale. <i>Piozzi
Letters</i>, i. 32. See <i>post</i>, April 17, 1778.</p>

<p>[1124] A letter from Boswell to Temple on this day helps to fill up the
gap in his journal:—'It gives me acute pain that I have not written
more to you since we parted last; but I have been like a skiff in the
sea, driven about by a multiplicity of waves. I am now at Mr. Thrale's
villa, at Streatham, a delightful spot. Dr. Johnson is here too. I came
yesterday to dinner, and this morning Dr. Johnson and I return to
London, and I go with Mr. Beauclerk to see his elegant villa and
library, worth £3000, at Muswell Hill, and return and dine with him. I
hope Dr. Johnson will dine with us. I am in that dissipated state of
mind that I absolutely cannot write; I at least imagine so. But while I
glow with gaiety, I feel friendship for you, nay, admiration of some of
your qualities, as strong as you could wish. My excellent friend, let us
ever cultivate that mutual regard which, as it has lasted till now,
will, I trust, never fail. On Saturday last I dined with John Wilkes and
his daughter, and nobody else, at the Mansion-House; it was a most
pleasant scene. I had that day breakfasted with Dr. Johnson. I drank tea
with Lord Bute's daughter-in-law, and I supped with Miss Boswell. What
variety! Mr. Johnson went with me to Beauclerk's villa, Beauclerk having
been ill; it is delightful, just at Highgate. He has one of the most
numerous and splendid private libraries that I ever saw; green-houses,
hot-houses, observatory, laboratory for chemical experiments, in short,
everything princely. We dined with him at his box at the Adelphi. I have
promised to Dr. Johnson to read when I get to Scotland, and to keep an
account of what I read; I shall let you know how I go on. My mind must
be nourished.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, pp. 193-5.</p>

<p>[1125] Swift did not laugh. 'He had a countenance sour and severe, which
he seldom softened by any appearance of gaiety. He stubbornly resisted
any tendency to laughter.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, viii. 222. Neither did
Pope laugh. 'By no merriment, either of others or his own, was he ever
seen excited to laughter.' <i>Ib</i> p. 312. Lord Chesterfield wrote
(<i>Letters</i> i. 329):—'How low and unbecoming a thing laughter is. I am
sure that since I have had the full use of my reason nobody has ever
heard me laugh.' Mrs. Piozzi records (<i>Anec</i>. p. 298) that 'Dr. Johnson
used to say "that the size of a man's understanding might always be
justly measured by his mirth;" and his own was never contemptible.'</p>

<p>[1126] The day before he wrote to Mrs. Thrale:—'Peyton and Macbean
[<i>ante</i>, i 187] are both starving, and I cannot keep them.' <i>Piozzi
Letters</i>, i. 218. On April 1, 1776, he wrote:—'Poor Peyton expired this
morning. He probably, during many years for which he sat starving by the
bed of a wife, not only useless but almost motionless, condemned by
poverty to personal attendance chained down to poverty—he probably
thought often how lightly he should tread the path of life without his
burthen. Of this thought the admission was unavoidable, and the
indulgence might be forgiven to frailty and distress. His wife died at
last, and before she was buried he was seized by a fever, and is now
going to the grave. Such miscarriages when they happen to those on whom
many eyes are fixed, fill histories and tragedies; and tears have been
shed for the sufferings, and wonder excited by the fortitude of those
who neither did nor suffered more than Peyton.' <i>Ib</i> 312. Baretti, in a
marginal note on <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 219, writes:—'Peyton was a fool
and a drunkard. I never saw so nauseous a fellow.' But Baretti was a
harsh judge.</p>

<p>[1127] A learned Greek. BOSWELL. 'He was a nephew of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, and had fled from some massacre of the Greeks.'
Johnstone's <i>Life of Parr</i>, i. 84.</p>

<p>[1128] See <i>ante</i>, p. 278.</p>

<p>[1129] Wife of the Rev. Mr. Kenneth Macaulay, authour of <i>The History of
St. Kilda</i>. BOSWELL. See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 28, 1773.</p>

<p>[1130] 'The Elzevirs of Glasgow,' as Boswell called them. (<i>Hebrides</i>,
Oct. 29.)</p>

<p>[1131] See in Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Johnson's letter of May 6, 1775.</p>

<p>[1132] A law-suit carried on by Sir Allan Maclean, Chief of his Clan, to
recover certain parts of his family estates from the Duke of
Argyle. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1133] A very learned minister in the Isle of Sky, whom both Dr. Johnson
and I have mentioned with regard. BOSWELL. Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept.
3, 1773, and Johnson's <i>Works</i>, ix. 54. Johnson in another passage,
(<i>ib</i>. p. 115), speaks of him as 'a very learned minister. He wished me
to be deceived [as regards Ossian] for the honour of his country; but
would not directly and formally deceive me.' Johnson told him this to
his face. Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 22. His credulity is shewn by the
belief he held, that the name of a place called Ainnit in Sky was the
same as the <i>Anaitidis delubrum</i> in Lydia. <i>Ib</i> Sept. 17.</p>

<p>[1134] This darkness is seen in his letters. He wrote 'June 3, 1775. It
required some philosophy to bear the change from England to Scotland.
The unpleasing tone, the rude familiarity, the barren conversation of
those whom I found here, in comparison with what I had left, really hurt
my feelings … The General Assembly is sitting, and I practise at its
Bar. There is <i>de facto</i> something low and coarse in such employment,
though on paper it is a Court of <i>Supreme Judicature</i>; but guineas must
be had … Do you know it requires more than ordinary spirit to do what
I am to do this very morning: I am to go to the General Assembly and
arraign a judgement pronounced last year by Dr. Robertson, John Home,
and a good many more of them, and they are to appear on the other side.
To speak well, when I despise both the cause and the Judges, is
difficult: but I believe I shall do wonderfully. I look forward with
aversion to the little, dull labours of the Court of Sessions. You see,
Temple, I have my troubles as well as you have. My promise under the
venerable yew has kept me sober.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 198. On June
19, he is 'vexed to think myself a coarse labourer in an obscure
corner…. Mr. Hume says there will in all probability be a change of
the Ministry soon, which he regrets. Oh, Temple, while they change so
often, how does one feel an ambition to have a share in the great
department! … My father is most unhappily dissatisfied with me. He
harps on my going over Scotland with a brute (think how shockingly
erroneous!) and wandering (or some such phrase) to London!' <i>Ib</i> p. 201.
'Aug. 12. I have had a pretty severe return this summer of that
melancholy, or hypochondria, which is inherent in my constitution….
While afflicted with melancholy, all the doubts which have ever
disturbed thinking men come upon me. I awake in the night dreading
annihilation, or being thrown into some horrible state of being.' He
recounts a complimentary letter he had received from Lord Mayor Wilkes,
and continues:—'Tell me, my dear Temple, if a man who receives so many
marks of more than ordinary consideration can be satisfied to drudge in
an obscure corner, where the manners of the people are disagreeable to
him.' <i>Ib</i> p. 209.</p>

<p>[1135] He was absent from the end of May till some time in August. He
wrote from Oxford on June 1:—'Don't suppose that I live here as we live
at Streatham. I went this morning to the chapel at <i>six</i>.' <i>Piozzi
Letters</i>, i. 223. He was the guest of Mr. Coulson, a Fellow of
University College. On June 6, he wrote:—'Such is the uncertainty of
all human things that Mr. Coulson has quarrelled with me. He says I
raise the laugh upon him, and he is an independent man, and all he has
is his own, and he is not used to such things.' <i>Ib</i> p. 226. An
eye-witness told Mr. Croker that 'Coulson was going out on a country
living, and talking of it with the same pomp as to Lord Stowell.' [He
had expressed to him his doubts whether, after living so long in the
<i>great world</i>, he might not grow weary of the comparative retirement of
a country parish. Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 425.] Johnson chose to imagine
his becoming an archdeacon, and made himself merry at Coulson's expense.
At last they got to warm words, and Johnson concluded the debate by
exclaiming emphatically—'Sir, having meant you no offence, I will make
you no apology.' <i>Ib</i> p. 458. The quarrel was made up, for the next day
he wrote:—'Coulson and I are pretty well again.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>,
i. 229.</p>

<p>[1136] Boswell wrote to Temple on Sept. 2:—'It is hardly credible how
difficult it is for a man of my sensibility to support existence in the
family where I now am. My father, whom I really both respect and
affectionate (if that is a word, for it is a different feeling from that
which is expressed by <i>love</i>, which I can say of you from my soul), is
so different from me. We <i>divaricate</i> so much, as Dr. Johnson said, that
I am often hurt when, I dare say, he means no harm: and he has a method
of treating me which makes me feel myself like a <i>timid boy</i>, which to
<i>Boswell</i> (comprehending all that my character does in my own
imagination and in that of a wonderful number of mankind) is
intolerable. His wife too, whom in my conscience I cannot condemn for
any capital bad quality, is so narrow-minded, and, I don't know how, so
set upon keeping him under her own management, and so suspicious and so
sourishly tempered that it requires the utmost exertion of practical
philosophy to keep myself quiet. I however have done so all this week to
admiration: nay, I have appeared good-humoured; but it has cost me
drinking a considerable quantity of strong beer to dull my faculties.'
<i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 215.</p>

<p>[1137] Voltaire wrote of Hénault's <i>Abrégé de l' Histoire de la
France</i>:—'Il a été dans l'histoire ce que Fontenelle a été dans la
philosophie. Il l'a rendue familière.' Voltaire's <i>Works</i>, xvii. 99.
With a quotation from Hénault, Carlyle begins his <i>French Revolution</i>.</p>

<p>[1138] My <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>, which that lady read in
the original manuscript. BOSWELL. Johnson wrote to Mrs. Thrale, 'May 22,
1775:—I am not sorry that you read Boswell's <i>Journal</i>. Is it not a
merry piece? There is much in it about poor me.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i.
220. 'June 11, 1775. You never told me, and I omitted to inquire, how
you were entertained by Boswell's <i>Journal</i>. <i>One would think the man
had been hired to be a spy upon me</i>. He was very diligent, and caught
opportunities of writing from time to time.' <i>Ib</i> p. 233. I suspect that
the words I have marked by italics are not Johnson's, but are Mrs.
Piozzi's interpolation.</p>

<p>[1139] 'In my heart of <i>heart</i>.' <i>Hamlet</i>, act iii. sc. 2.</p>

<p>[1140] Another parcel of Lord Hailes's <i>Annals of Scotland</i>. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1141] Where Sir Joshua Reynolds lived. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1142] Johnson's birthday. In <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 143, is a prayer which
was, he writes, 'composed at Calais in a sleepless night, and used
before the morn at Nôtre Dame.'</p>

<p>[1143] See <i>ante</i>, i. 243, note 3.</p>

<p>[1144] 'While Johnson was in France, he was generally very resolute in
speaking Latin.' <i>Post</i>, under Nov. 12, 1775.</p>

<p>[1145] Miss Thrale. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1146] In his <i>Journal</i> he records 'their meals are gross' (<i>post</i>, Oct.
10). We may doubt therefore Mrs. Piozzi's statement that he said of the
French: 'They have few sentiments, but they express them neatly; they
have little in meat too, but they dress it well.' Piozzi's <i>Anec</i>.
p. 102.</p>

<p>[1147] See <i>ante</i>, i. 362, note 1.</p>

<p>[1148] Boswell wrote to Temple:—'You know, my dearest friend, of what
importance this is to me; of what importance it is to the family of
Auchinleck, <i>which you may be well convinced is my supreme object in
this world</i>.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 217. Alexander Boswell was killed
in a duel in 1822.</p>

<p>[1149] This alludes to my old feudal principle of preferring male to
female succession. BOSWELL. See <i>post</i>, under Jan. 10, 1776.</p>

<p>[1150] He wrote to Dr. Taylor on the same day:—'I came back last
Tuesday from France. Is not mine a kind of life turned upside down?
Fixed to a spot when I was young, and roving the world when others are
contriving to sit still, I am wholly unsettled. I am a kind of ship with
a wide sail, and without an anchor.' <i>Notes and Queries</i>. 6th S.,
v. 422.</p>

<p>[1151] There can be no doubt that many years previous to 1775 he
corresponded with this lady, who was his step-daughter, but none of his
earlier letters to her have been preserved. BOSWELL. Many of these
earlier letters were printed by Malone and Croker in later editions.
See i. 512.</p>

<p>[1152] When on their way to Wales, July 7, 1774, <i>post</i>, vol. v.</p>

<p>[1153] Smollett wrote (<i>Travels</i>, i. 88):—'Notwithstanding the gay
disposition of the French, their houses are all gloomy. After all it is
in England only where we must look for cheerful apartments, gay
furniture, neatness, and convenience.'</p>

<p>[1154] Son of Mrs. Johnson, by her first husband. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1155] 'A gentleman said, "Surely that Vanessa must be an extraordinary
woman, that could inspire the Dean to write so finely upon her." Mrs.
Johnson [Stella] smiled, and answered "that she thought that point not
quite so clear; for it was well known the Dean could write finely upon a
broomstick."' Johnson's Works, viii. 210.</p>

<p>[1156] Horace Walpole wrote from Paris this autumn:—'I have not yet had
time to visit the Hotel du Chatelet.' <i>Letters</i>, vi. 260. On July 31st,
1789, writing of the violence of the mob, he says:—'The hotel of the
Due de Chatelet, lately built and superb, has been assaulted, and the
furniture sold by auction.' <i>Ib</i> ix. 202.</p>

<p>[1157] See <i>post</i>, under Nov. 12, 1775, note, and June 25, 1784.</p>

<p>[1158] The Prior of the Convent of the Benedictines where Johnson had a
cell appropriated to him. <i>Post</i>, Oct. 31, and under Nov. 12.</p>

<p>[1159] The rest of this paragraph appears to be a minute of what was
told by Captain Irwin. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1160] Melchior Canus, a celebrated Spanish Dominican, who died at
Toledo, in 1560. He wrote a treatise <i>De Locis Theologicis</i>, in twelve
books. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1161] D'Argenson's. CROKER.</p>

<p>[1162] See Macaulay's <i>Essays</i>, i. 355, and Mr. Croker's answer in his
note on this passage. His notion that 'this book was exhibited purposely
on the lady's table, in the expectation that her English visitors would
think it a literary curiosity,' seems absurd. He does not choose to
remember the '<i>Bibl. des Fées</i> and other books.' Since I wrote this note
Mr. Napier has published an edition of Boswell, in which this question
is carefully examined (ii. 550). He sides with Macaulay.</p>

<p>[1163] 'Si quelque invention peut suppléer à la connaissance qui nous
est refusée des longitudes sur la mer, c'est celle du plus habile
horloger de France (M. Leroi) qui dispute cette invention Ã
l'Angleterre.' Voltaire, <i>Siècle de Louis XV</i>, ch. 43.</p>

<p>[1164] The <i>Palais Marchand</i> was properly only the stalls which were
placed along some of the galleries of the Palais. They have been all
swept away in Louis Philippe's restoration of the Palais. CROKER.</p>

<p>[1165] 'Petit siège de bois sur lequel on faisait asseoir, pour les
interroger, ceux qui étaient accusés d'un délit pouvant faire encourir
une peine afflictive.' LITTRÃ.</p>

<p>[1166] The Conciergerie, before long to be crowded with the victims of
the Revolution.</p>

<p>[1167] This passage, which so many think superstitious, reminds me of
Archbishop Laud's Diary. BOSWELL. Laud, for instance, on Oct. 27, 1640,
records:—'In my upper study hung my picture taken by the life; and
coming in, I found it fallen down upon the face, and lying on the floor,
the string being broken by which it was hanged against the wall. I am
almost every day threatened with my ruin in Parliament. God grant this
be no omen.' Perhaps there was nothing superstitious in Johnson's entry.
He may have felt ill in mind or body, and dreaded to become worse.</p>

<p>[1168] For a brief account of Fréron, father and son, see Carlyle's
<i>French Revolution</i>, part ii. bk. 1. ch. 4.</p>

<p>[1169] A round table, the centre of which descended by machinery to a
lower floor, so that supper might be served without the presence of
servants. It was invented by Lewis XV. during the favour of Madame du
Barri. CROKER.</p>

<p>[1170] See <i>ante</i>, i. 363, note 3.</p>

<p>[1171] Before the Revolution the passage from the garden of the
Tuileries into the Place Louis XV. was over a <i>pont tournant</i>. CROKER.</p>

<p>[1172] The niece of Arabella Fermor, the Belinda of the <i>Rape of the
Lock</i>. Johnson thus mentions this lady (<i>Works</i>, viii. 246):—'At Paris,
a few years ago, a niece of Mrs. Fermor, who presided in an English
convent, mentioned Pope's works with very little gratitude, rather as an
insult than an honour.' She is no doubt the Lady Abbess mentioned
<i>post</i>, March 15, 1776. She told Mrs. Piozzi in 1784 'that she believed
there was but little comfort to be found in a house that harboured
poets; for that she remembered Mr. Pope's praise made her aunt very
troublesome and conceited, while his numberless caprices would have
employed ten servants to wait on him.' Piozzi's <i>Journey</i>, i. 20.</p>

<p>[1173] Mrs. Thrale wrote, on Sept. 18, 1777:—'When Mr. Thrale dismisses
me, I am to take refuge among the Austin Nuns, and study Virgil with
dear Miss Canning.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 374.</p>

<p>[1174] <i>Pensionnaires</i>, pupils who boarded in the convent.</p>

<p>[1175] He brought back a snuff-box for Miss Porter. <i>Ante</i>, p. 387.</p>

<p>[1176] 63 livres = £2 12s. 6d.</p>

<p>[1177] Torture-chamber. See <i>ante</i>, i. 467, note 1.</p>

<p>[1178] 'Au parlement de Paris la chambre chargée des affaires
criminelles.' LITTRÃ.</p>

<p>[1179] The grandson was the Duke d'Enghien who was put to death by
Napoleon Bonaparte in 1804.</p>

<p>[1180] His tender affection for his departed wife, of which there are
many evidences in his <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, appears very feelingly
in this passage. BOSWELL. 'On many occasions I think what she [his wife]
would have said or done. When I saw the sea at Brighthelmstone, I wished
for her to have seen it with me.' <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 91.</p>

<p>[1181] See <i>post</i>, p. 402.</p>

<p>[1182] See <i>post</i>, iii. 89.</p>

<p>[1183] Dr. Moore (<i>Travels in France</i>, i. 31) says that in Paris, 'those
who cannot afford carriages skulk behind pillars, or run into shops, to
avoid being crushed by the coaches, which are driven as near the wall as
the coachman pleases.' Only on the Pont Neuf, and the Pont Royal, and
the quays between them were there, he adds, foot-ways.</p>

<p>[1184] Lewis XVI.</p>

<p>[1185] The King's sister, who was guillotined in the Reign of Terror.</p>

<p>[1186] See p. 391. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1187] 'When at Versailles, the people showed us the Theatre. As we
stood on the stage looking at some machinery for playhouse purposes;
"Now we are here, what shall we act, Mr. Johnson:—<i>The Englishman in
Paris</i>"? "No, no," replied he, "we will try to act <i>Harry the Fifth</i>."'
Piozzi's <i>Anec</i>. p. 101. <i>The Englishman in Paris</i> is a comedy by Foote.</p>

<p>[1188] This epithet should be applied to this animal, with one bunch.
BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1189] He who commanded the troops at the execution of Lewis XVI.</p>

<p>[1190] 1462.</p>

<p>[1191] I cannot learn of any book of this name. Perhaps Johnson saw
<i>Durandi Rationale Officiorum Divinorum</i>, which was printed in 1459, one
year later than Johnson mentions. A copy of this he had seen at Blenheim
in 1774. His <i>Journey into North Wales</i>, Sept. 22.</p>

<p>[1192] He means, I suppose, that he read these different pieces while he
remained in the library. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1193] Johnson in his <i>Dictionary</i> defines <i>Apartment</i> as <i>A room; a set
of rooms</i>.</p>

<p>[1194] Smollett (<i>Travels</i>, i. 85) writes of these temporary
servants:—'You cannot conceive with what eagerness and dexterity these
rascally valets exert themselves in pillaging strangers. There is always
one ready in waiting on your arrival, who begins by assisting your own
servant to unload your baggage, and interests himself in your own
affairs with such artful officiousness that you will find it difficult
to shake him off.'</p>

<p>[1195] Livres—francs we should now say.</p>

<p>[1196] It was here that Rousseau got rid of his children. 'Je savais que
l'éducation pour eux la moins perilleuse était celle des enfans trouvés;
et je les y mis.' <i>Les Reveries, ix'me promenade</i>.</p>

<p>[1197] Dr. Franklin, in 1785, wrote:—'I am credibly informed that
nine-tenths of them die there pretty soon.' <i>Memoirs</i>, iii. 187. Lord
Kames (<i>Sketches of the History of Man</i>, iii. 91) says:—'The Paris
almanac for the year 1768 mentions that there were baptised 18,576
infants, of whom the foundling-hospital received 6025.'</p>

<p>[1198] St. Germain des Prés. Better known as the Prison of the Abbaye.</p>

<p>[1199] I have looked in vain into De Bure, Meerman, Mattaire, and other
typographical books, for the two editions of the <i>Catholicon</i>, which Dr.
Johnson mentions here, with <i>names</i> which I cannot make out. I read 'one
by <i>Latinius</i>, one by <i>Boedinus</i>.' I have deposited the original MS. in
the British Museum, where the curious may see it. My grateful
acknowledgements are due to Mr. Planta for the trouble he was pleased to
take in aiding my researches. BOSWELL. A Mr. Planta is mentioned in Mme.
D'Arblay's <i>Diary</i>, v. 39.</p>

<p>[1200] Friar Wilkes visited Johnson in May 1776. <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i.
336. On Sept. 18, 1777, Mrs. Thrale wrote to Johnson:—'I have got some
news that will please you now. Here is an agreeable friend come from
Paris, whom you were very fond of when we were there—the Prior of our
English Benedictine Convent, Mr. Cowley … He inquires much for you;
and says Wilkes is very well, No. 45, as they call him in the Convent. A
cell is always kept ready for your use he tells me.' <i>Ib</i> p. 373.</p>

<p>[1201] The writing is so bad here, that the names of several of the
animals could not be decyphered without much more acquaintance with
natural history than I possess.—Dr. Blagden, with his usual politeness,
most obligingly examined the MS. To that gentleman, and to Dr. Gray, of
the British Museum, who also very readily assisted me, I beg leave to
express my best thanks. BOSWELL</p>

<p>[1202] It is thus written by Johnson, from the French pronunciation of
<i>fossane</i>. It should be observed, that the person who shewed this
Menagerie was mistaken in supposing the <i>fossane</i> and the Brasilian
weasel to be the same, the <i>fossane</i> being a different animal, and a
native of Madagascar. I find them, however, upon one plate in Pennant's
<i>Synopsis of Quadrupeds</i>. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1203] How little Johnson relished this talk is shewn by his letter to
Mrs. Thrale of May 1, 1780, and by her answer. He wrote:—'The
Exhibition, how will you do, either to see or not to see? The Exhibition
is eminently splendid. There is contour, and keeping, and grace, and
expression, and all the varieties of artificial excellence.' <i>Piozzi
Letters</i>, ii. III. She answered:—'When did I ever plague about contour,
and grace, and expression? I have dreaded them all three since that
hapless day at Compiegne when you teased me so.' <i>Ib</i> p. 116</p>

<p>[1204] '<i>Nef</i>, (old French from <i>nave</i>) <i>the body of a church</i>.'
Johnson's <i>Dictionary</i>.</p>

<p>[1205] My worthy and ingenious friend, Mr. Andrew Lumisden, by his
accurate acquaintance with France, enabled me to make out many proper
names, which Dr. Johnson had written indistinctly, and sometimes spelt
erroneously. Boswell. Lumisden is mentioned in Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 13.</p>

<p>[1206] Baretti, in a marginal note on <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 142, says
that 'Johnson saw next to nothing of Paris.' On p. 159 he adds:—'He
noticed the country so little that he scarcely spoke of it ever after.'
He shews, however, his ignorance of Johnson's doings by saying that 'in
France he never touched a pen.'</p>

<p>[1207] Hume's reception in 1763 was very different. He wrote to Adam
Smith:—'I have been three days at Paris, and two at Fontainebleau, and
have everywhere met with the most extraordinary honours which the most
exorbitant vanity could wish or desire.' The Dauphin's three children,
afterwards Lewis XVI, Lewis XVIII, and Charles X, had each to make a set
speech of congratulation. He was the favourite of the most exclusive
coteries. J.H. Burton's <i>Hume</i>, ii. 168, 177, 208. But at that date,
sceptical philosophy was the rage.</p>

<p>[1208] Horace Walpole wrote from Paris in 1771 (<i>Letters</i>, v.
317-19):—'The distress here is incredible, especially at Court…. The
middling and common people are not much richer than Job when he had lost
everything but his patience.' Rousseau wrote of the French in
1777:—'Cette nation qui se prétend si gaie montre peu cette gaité dans
ses jeux. Souvent j'allais jadis aux guinguettes pour y voir danser le
menu peuple; mais ses danses étaient si maussades, son maintien si
dolent, si gauche, que j'en sortais plutot contristé que réjoui.' <i>Les
Réveries, IXme. promenade</i>. Baretti (<i>Journey to Genoa</i>, iv. 146) denies
that the French 'are entitled to the appellation of cheerful.'
'Provence,' he says (<i>ib</i>. 148), 'is the only province in which you see
with some sort of frequency the rustic assemblies roused up to
cheerfulness by the <i>fifre</i> and the <i>tambourin</i>.' Mrs. Piozzi describes
the absence of 'the happy middle state' abroad. 'As soon as Dover is
left behind, every man seems to belong to some other man, and no man to
himself.' Piozzi's <i>Journey</i>, ii. 341. Voltaire, in his review of <i>Julia
Mandeville</i> (<i>Works</i>, xliii. 364), says:—'Pour peu qu'un roman, une
tragédie, une comédie ait de succès a Londres, on en fait trois et
quatre éditions en peu de mois; c'est que l'état mitoyen est plus riche
et plus instruit en Angleterre qu'en France, &amp;c.' But Barry, the painter
(<i>post</i>, May 17, 1783), in 1766, described to Burke, 'the crowds of busy
contented people which cover (as one may say) the whole face of the
country.' But he was an Irishman comparing France with Ireland. 'They
make a strong, but melancholy contrast to a miserable ——— which I
cannot help thinking of sometimes. You will not be at any loss to know
that I mean Ireland.' Barry's <i>Works</i>, i. 57. 'Hume,' says Dr. J. H.
Burton, 'in his <i>Essay on The Parties of Great Britain</i> (published in
1741), alludes to the absence of a middle class in Scotland, where he
says, there are only "two ranks of men, gentlemen who have some fortune
and education, and the meanest starving poor; without any considerable
number of the middling rank of men, which abounds more in England, both
in cities and in the country, than in any other quarter of the world."'
<i>Life of Hume</i>, i. 198. I do not find this passage in the edition of
Hume's <i>Essays</i> of 1770.</p>

<p>[1209] Yet Smollett wrote in 1763:—'All manner of butcher's meat and
poultry are extremely good in Paris. The beef is excellent.' He adds, 'I
can by no means relish their cookery.' Smollett's <i>Travels</i>, i. 86.
Horace Walpole, in 1765, wrote from Amiens on his way to Paris:—'I am
almost famished for want of clean victuals, and comfortable tea, and
bread and butter.' <i>Letters</i>, iv. 401. Goldsmith, in 1770, wrote from
Paris:—'As for the meat of this country I can scarce eat it, and though
we pay two good shillings an head for our dinner, I find it all so
tough, that I have spent less time with my knife than my pick-tooth.'
Forster's <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 219.</p>

<p>[1210] Walpole calls Paris 'the ugliest, beastliest town in the
universe,' and describes the indelicacy of the talk of women of the
first rank. <i>Letters</i>, iv. 435. See <i>post</i>, May 13, 1778, and under
Aug. 29, 1783.</p>

<p>[1211] Madame du Boccage, according to Miss Reynolds, whose authority
was Baretti. Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 467. See <i>post</i>, June 25, 1784.</p>

<p>[1212] In Edinburgh, Johnson threw a glass of lemonade out of the window
because the waiter had put the sugar into it 'with his greasy fingers.'
Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 14.</p>

<p>[1213] Mrs. Thrale wrote to Johnson in 1782:—'When we were in France we
could form little judgement [of the spread of refinement], as our time
was passed chiefly among English; yet I recollect that one fine lady,
who entertained us very splendidly, put her mouth to the teapot, and
blew in the spout when it did not pour freely.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>,
ii. 247.</p>

<p>[1214] That he did not continue exactly as in London is stated by
Boswell himself. 'He was furnished with a Paris-made wig of handsome
construction,' (<i>Post</i>, April 28, 1778). His <i>Journal</i> shews that he
bought articles of dress (<i>ante</i>, p. 398). Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 517) says
that 'he yielded to the remonstrances of his friends so far as to dress
in a suit of black and a Bourgeois wig, but resisted their importunity
to wear ruffles. By a note in his diary it appears that he laid out near
thirty pounds in clothes for this journey.' A story told by Foote we may
believe as little as we please. 'Foote is quite impartial,' said
Johnson, 'for he tells lies of everybody.' <i>Post</i>, under March 15, 1776.</p>

<p>[1215] If Johnson's Latin was understood by foreigners in France, but
not in England, the explanation may be found in his <i>Life of Milton</i>
(<i>Works</i>, vii. 99), where he says:—'He who travels, if he speaks Latin,
may so soon learn the sounds which every native gives it, that he need
make no provision before his journey; and if strangers visit us, it is
their business to practise such conformity to our modes as they expect
from us in their own countries.' Johnson was so sturdy an Englishman
that likely enough, as he was in London, he would not alter his
pronunciation to suit his Excellency's ear. In Priestley's <i>Works</i>,
xxiii. 233, a conversation is reported in which Dr. Johnson argued for
the Italian method of pronouncing Latin.</p>

<p>[1216] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 80.</p>

<p>[1217] As Mme. de Boufflers is mentioned in the next paragraph, Boswell
no doubt, wishes to shew that the letter was addressed to her. She was
the mistress of the Prince of Conti. She understood English, and was the
correspondent of Hume. There was also a Marquise de Boufflers, mistress
of old King Stanislaus.</p>

<p>[1218] In the <i>Piozzi Letters</i> (i. 34), this letter is dated May 16,
1771; in Boswell's first and second editions, July 16, 1771; in the
third edition, July 16, 1775. In May, 1771, Johnson, so far as there is
anything to shew, was in London. On July 16, both in 1771 and 1775, he
was in Ashbourne. One of Hume's Letters (<i>Private Corres</i>., p. 283),
dated April 17, 1775, shews that Mme. de Boufflers was at that time
'speaking of coming to England.'</p>

<p>[1219] Mme. de Boufflers was in England in the summer of 1763. Jesse's
<i>Selwyn</i>, i. 235.</p>

<p>[1220] Boscovich, a learned Jesuit, was born at Ragusa in 1711, and died
in 1787. He visited London in 1760, and was elected a Fellow of the
Royal Society. Chalmers's <i>Biog. Dict</i>. See <i>ante</i>, p. 125.</p>

<p>[1221] See <i>ante</i>, p. 288.</p>

<p>[1222] Four years later Johnson thus spoke to Miss Burney of her
father:—'"I love Burney; my heart goes out to meet him." "He is not
ungrateful, Sir," cried I; "for most heartily does he love you." "Does
he, Madam? I am surprised at that." "Why, Sir? Why should you have
doubted it?" "Because, Madam, Dr. Burney is a man for all the world to
love: it is but natural to love him." I could have almost cried with
delight at this cordial, unlaboured <i>éloge</i>.' Mme. D'Arblay's
<i>Diary</i>, i. 196.</p>

<p>[1223] 'Though a sepulchral inscription is professedly a panegyrick, and
therefore not confined to historical impartiality, yet it ought always
to be written with regard to truth. No man ought to be commended for
virtues which he never possessed, but whoever is curious to know his
faults must inquire after them in other places.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, v.
265. See <i>post</i>, April 24, 1779.</p>

<p>[1224] See <i>ante</i>, i. 46.</p>

<p>[1225] See <i>post</i>, iii. 12, and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 22.</p>

<p>[1226] Johnson's Dick Wormwood, in <i>The Idler</i>, No. 83, a man 'whose
sole delight is to find everything wrong, triumphs when he talks on the
present system of education, and tells us with great vehemence that we
are learning words when we should learn things.' In the <i>Life of Milton</i>
(<i>Works</i>, vii, 75), Johnson writes:—'It is told that in the art of
education Milton performed wonders; and a formidable list is given of
the authors, Greek and Latin, that were read in Aldersgate-street, by
youth between ten and fifteen or sixteen years of age. Those who tell or
receive these stories should consider, that nobody can be taught faster
than he can learn. The speed of the horseman must be limited by the
power of the horse.' He advised Boswell 'not to <i>refine</i> in the
education of his children. You must do as other people do.' <i>Post</i>, iii.
169. Yet, in his <i>Life of Barretier</i> (<i>Works</i>, vi. 380), he says:—'The
first languages which he learnt were the French, German, and Latin,
which he was taught, not in the common way, by a multitude of
definitions, rules, and exceptions, which fatigue the attention and
burden the memory, without any use proportionate to the time which they
require and the disgust which they create. The method by which he was
instructed was easy and expeditious, and therefore pleasing. He learnt
them all in the same manner, and almost at the same time, by conversing
in them indifferently with his father.'</p>

<p>[1227] Miss Aikin, better known as Mrs. Barbauld. Johnson uses
<i>Presbyterian</i> where we should use <i>Unitarian</i>. 'The Unitarians of the
present day [1843] are the representatives of that branch of the early
Nonconformists who received the denomination of Presbyterians; and they
are still known by that name.' <i>Penny Cyclo</i>. xxvi. 6.</p>

<p>[1228] Othello, act ii. sc. 1.</p>

<p>[1229] He quotes Barbauld's <i>Lessons for Children</i> (p. 68, ed. of 1878).
Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 16), speaking of books for children says:—'Mrs.
Barbauld had his best praise; no man was more struck than Mr. Johnson
with voluntary descent from possible splendour to painful duty.' Mrs.
Piozzi alludes to Johnson's praise of Dr. Watts:—'Every man acquainted
with the common principles of human action, will look with veneration on
the writer, who is at one time combating Locke, and at another making a
catechism for children in their fourth year. A voluntary descent from
the dignity of science is perhaps the hardest lesson that humility can
teach.' <i>Works</i>, viii. 384. He praised Milton also, who, when 'writing
<i>Paradise Lost</i>, could condescend from his elevation to rescue children
from the perplexity of grammatical confusion, and the trouble of lessons
unnecessarily repeated.' <i>Ib</i> vii. 99. Mrs. Barbauld did what Swift said
Gay had shown could be done. 'One may write things to a child without
being childish.' Swift's <i>Works</i>, xvii. 221. In her <i>Advertisement</i>, she
says:—'The task is humble, but not mean; to plant the first idea in a
human mind can be no dishonour to any hand.' 'Ethicks, or morality,'
wrote Johnson, 'is one of the studies which ought to begin with the
first glimpse of reason, and only end with life itself.' <i>Works</i>, v.
243. This might have been the motto of her book. As the <i>Advertisement</i>
was not published till 1778 (Barbauld's <i>Works</i>, ii. 19) it is possible
that Johnson's criticism had reached her, and that it was meant as an
answer. Among her pupils were William Taylor of Norwich, Sir William
Gell, and the first Lord Denman (<i>ib</i>. i. xxv-xxx). Mrs. Barbauld bore
Johnson no ill-will. In her <i>Eighteen Hundred and Eleven</i>, she describes
some future pilgrims 'from the Blue Mountains or Ontario's Lake,' coming
to view 'London's faded glories.'</p>

<p>'With throbbing bosoms shall the wanderers tread<br/>

The hallowed mansions of the silent dead,<br/>

Shall enter the long aisle and vaulted dome<br/>

Where genius and where valour find a home;<br/>

Bend at each antique shrine, and frequent turn<br/>

To clasp with fond delight some sculptured urn,<br/>

The ponderous mass of Johnson's form to greet,<br/>

Or breathe the prayer at Howard's sainted feet.'<br/>
</p>

<p><i>Ib</i> i. 242.</p>

<p>[1230] According to Mme. D'Arblay he said:—'Sir, I shall be very glad
to have a new sense <i>put into</i> me.' He had been wont to speak
slightingly of music and musicians. 'The first symptom that he showed of
a tendency to conversion was upon hearing the following read aloud from
the preface to Dr. Burney's <i>History of Music</i> while it was yet in
manuscript:—"The love of lengthened tones and modulated sounds seems a
passion implanted in human nature throughout the globe; as we hear of no
people, however wild and savage in other particulars, who have not music
of some kind or other, with which they seem greatly delighted." "Sir,"
cried Dr. Johnson after a little pause, "this assertion I believe may be
right." And then, see-sawing a minute or two on his chair, he forcibly
added:—"All animated nature loves music—except myself!"' <i>Dr. Burney's
Memoirs</i>, ii. 77. Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 319) says that Johnson said of
music, '"it excites in my mind no ideas, and hinders me from
contemplating my own." I have sometimes thought that music was positive
pain to him. Upon his hearing a celebrated performer go through a hard
composition, and hearing it remarked that it was very difficult, he
said, "I would it had been impossible."' Yet he had once bought a
flageolet, though he had never made out a tune. 'Had I learnt to
fiddle,' he said, 'I should have done nothing else' (<i>post</i>, April 7,
1778, and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 15, 1773). Not six months before
his death he asked Dr. Burney to teach him the scale of music (<i>ante</i>,
p. 263, note 4). That 'he appeared fond of the bagpipe, and used often
to stand for some time with his ear close to the great drone' (Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 15), does not tell for much either way. In his
<i>Hebrides</i> (<i>Works</i>, ix. 55), he shews his pleasure in singing. 'After
supper,' he writes, 'the ladies sung Erse songs, to which I listened, as
an English audience to an Italian opera, delighted with the sound of
words which I did not understand.' Boswell records (<i>Hebrides</i>, Sept.
28) that another day a lady 'pleased him much, by singing Erse songs,
and playing on the guitar.' Johnson himself shews that if his ear was
dull to music, it was by no means dead to sound. He thus describes a
journey by night in the Highlands (<i>Works</i>, ix. 155):—'The wind was
loud, the rain was heavy, and the whistling of the blast, the fall of
the shower, the rush of the cataracts, and the roar of the torrent, made
a nobler chorus of the rough music of nature than it had ever been my
chance to hear before.' In 1783, when he was in his seventy-fourth year,
he said, on hearing the music of a funeral procession:—'This is the
first time that I have ever been affected by musical sounds.' <i>Post</i>,
1780, in Mr. Langton's <i>Collection</i>.</p>

<p>[1231] Miss Burney, in 1778, records that he said:—'David, Madam, looks
much older than he is; for his face has had double the business of any
other man's; it is never at rest; when he speaks one minute, he has
quite a different countenance to what he assumes the next; I don't
believe he ever kept the same look for half-an-hour together in the
whole course of his life; and such an eternal, restless, fatiguing play
of the muscles must certainly wear out a man's face before its real
time.' Mme. D'Arblay's <i>Diary</i>, i. 64. Malone fathers this witticism on
Foote. Prior's <i>Malone</i>, p. 369.</p>

<p>[1232] On Nov. 2 of this year, a proposal was made to Garrick by the
proprietors of Covent-Garden Theatre, 'that now in the time of dearth
and sickness' they should open their theatres only five nights in each
week. <i>Garrick Corres</i>, ii. 108.</p>

<p>[1233] 'Mrs. Boswell no doubt had disliked his wish to pass over his
daughters in entailing the Auchinleck estate, in favour of heirs-male
however remote. <i>Post</i>, p. 414—Johnson, on Feb. 9, 1776, opposing this
intention, wrote:—'I hope I shall get some ground now with
Mrs. Boswell.'</p>

<p>[1234] Joseph Ritter, a Bohemian, who was in my service many years, and
attended Dr. Johnson and me in our Tour to the Hebrides. After having
left me for some time, he had now returned to me. BOSWELL. See
<i>ante</i>, ii. 103.</p>

<p>[1235] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i> near the end.</p>

<p>[1236] See <i>ante</i>, p. 383.</p>

<p>[1237] Mr. Croker says that he was informed by Boswell's grand-daughter,
who died in 1836, that it had come to be pronounced Auchinleck. The Rev.
James Chrystal, the minister of Auchinleck, in answer to my inquiry,
politely informs me that 'the name "Affleck" is still quite common as
applied to the parish, and even Auchinleck House is as often called
Place Affleck as otherwise.'</p>

<p>[1238] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Nov. 4.</p>

<p>[1239] Acts of Parliament of Scotland, 1685, cap. 22. BOSWELL. Cockburn
(<i>Life of Jeffrey</i>, i. 372) mentions 'the statute (11 and 12 Victoria,
chap. 36) which dissolves the iron fetters by which, for about 160
years, nearly three-fourths of the whole land in Scotland was made
permanently unsaleable, and unattachable for debt, and every acre in the
kingdom might be bound up, throughout all ages, in favour of any heirs,
or any conditions, that the caprice of each unfettered owner might be
pleased to proscribe.'</p>

<p>[1240] As first, the opinion of some distinguished naturalists, that our
species is transmitted through males only, the female being all along no
more than a <i>nidus</i>, or nurse, as Mother Earth is to plants of every
sort; which notion seems to be confirmed by that text of scripture, 'He
was yet <i>in the loins of his</i> FATHER when Melchisedeck met him' (Heb.
vii. 10); and consequently, that a man's grandson by a daughter, instead
of being his <i>surest</i> descendant as is vulgarly said, has in reality no
connection whatever with his blood. And secondly, independent of this
theory, (which, if true, should completely exclude heirs general,) that
if the preference of a male to a female, without regard to
primogeniture, (as a son, though much younger, nay, even a grandson by a
son, to a daughter,) be once admitted, as it universally is, it must be
equally reasonable and proper in the most remote degree of descent from
an original proprietor of an estate, as in the nearest;
because,—however distant from the representative at the time,—that
remote heir male, upon the failure of those nearer to the <i>original
proprietor</i> than he is, becomes in fact the nearest male to <i>him</i>, and
is, therefore, preferable as <i>his</i> representative, to a female
descendant.—A little extension of mind will enable us easily to
perceive that a son's son, in continuation to whatever length of time,
is preferable to a son's daughter, in the succession to an ancient
inheritance; in which regard should be had to the representation of the
original proprietor, and not to that of one of his descendants.</p>

<p>I am aware of Blackstone's admirable demonstration of the reasonableness
of the legal succession, upon the principle of there being the greatest
probability that the nearest heir of the person who last dies proprietor
of an estate, is of the blood of the first purchaser. But supposing a
pedigree to be carefully authenticated through all its branches, instead
of mere <i>probability</i> there will be a <i>certainty</i> that <i>the nearest heir
male, at whatever period</i>, has the same right of blood with the first
heir male, namely, <i>the original purchaser's eldest son</i>. Boswell.</p>

<p>[1241] Boswell wrote to Temple on Sept. 2, 1775:—'What a discouraging
reflection is it that my father has in his possession a renunciation of
my birthright, which I <i>madly</i> granted to him, and which he has not the
generosity to restore now that I am doing beyond his utmost hopes, and
that he may incommode and disgrace me by some strange settlements, while
all this time not a shilling is secured to my wife and children in case
of my death!' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 216.</p>

<p>[1242] The technical term in Roman law for a building in good repair.</p>

<p>[1243] Which term I applied to all the heirs male. Boswell.</p>

<p>[1244] A misprint for 1776.</p>

<p>[1245] I had reminded him of his observation mentioned, ii. 261.
BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1246] The entail framed by my father with various judicious clauses,
was settled by him and me, settling the estate upon the heirs male of
his grandfather, which I found had been already done by my grandfather,
imperfectly, but so as to be defeated only by selling the lands. I was
freed by Dr. Johnson from scruples of conscientious obligation, and
could, therefore, gratify my father. But my opinion and partiality of
male succession, in its full extent, remained unshaken. Yet let me not
be thought harsh or unkind to daughters; for my notion is, that they
should be treated with great affection and tenderness, and always
participate of the prosperity of the family. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1247] Temple, in <i>Popular Discontents</i> (<i>Works</i>, iii. 62-64), examines
the general dissatisfaction with the judicature of the House of Lords.
Till the end of Elizabeth's reign, he states, the peers, who were few in
number, were generally possessed of great estates which rendered them
less subject to corruption. As one remedy for the evil existing in his
time, he suggests that the Crown shall create no Baron, who shall not at
the same time entail £4000 a year upon that honour, whilst it continues
in his family; a Viscount, £5000; an Earl, £6000; a Marquis, £7000; and
a Duke, £8000.</p>

<p>[1248] 'A cruel tyranny bathed in the blood of their Emperors upon every
succession; a heap of vassals and slaves; no nobles, no gentlemen, no
freeman, no inheritance of land, no strip of ancient families, [nullæ
stirpes antiquæ].' Spedding <i>Bacon</i>, vii. 22.</p>

<p>[1249] 'Let me warn you very earnestly against scruples,' he wrote on
March 5, of this year:—'I am no friend to scruples,' he had said at St.
Andrew's. Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 19. 'On his many, men miserable,
but few men good.' Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 844.</p>

<p>[1250] A letter to him on the interesting subject of the family
settlement, which I had read. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1251] Paoli had given Boswell much the same advice. 'All this,' said
Paoli, 'is melancholy. I have also studied metaphysics. I know the
arguments for fate and free-will, for the materiality and immateriality
of the soul, and even the subtle arguments for and against the existence
of matter. <i>Ma lasciamo queste dispute ai oziosi</i>. But let us leave
these disputes to the idle. <i>Io tengo sempre fermo un gran pensiero</i>. I
hold always firm one great object. I never feel a moment of
despondency.' Boswell's <i>Corsica</i>, ed. 1879, p. 193. See <i>post</i>,
March 14, 1781.</p>

<p>[1252] Johnson, in his letters to the Thrales during the year 1775,
mentions this riding-school eight or nine times. The person recommended
was named Carter. Gibbon (<i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 72) says 'the profit of the
<i>History</i> has been applied to the establishment of a riding-school, that
the polite exercises might be taught, I know not with what success, in
the University.'</p>

<p>[1253] I suppose the complaint was, that the trustees of the Oxford
Press did not allow the London booksellers a sufficient profit upon
vending their publications. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1254] Cadell published <i>The False Alarm and The Journey to the
Hebrides</i>. Gibbon described him as 'That honest and liberal bookseller.'
Stewart's <i>Life of Robertson,</i> p. 366.</p>

<p>[1255] I am happy in giving this full and clear statement to the
publick, to vindicate, by the authority of the greatest authour of his
age, that respectable body of men, the Booksellers of London, from
vulgar reflections, as if their profits were exorbitant, when, in truth,
Dr. Johnson has here allowed them more than they usually demand.</p>

<p>[1256] 'Behind the house was a garden which he took delight in watering;
a room on the ground-floor was assigned to Mrs. Williams, and the whole
of the two pair of stairs floor was made a repository for his books; one
of the rooms thereon being his study. Here, in the intervals of his
residence at Streatham, he received the visits of his friends, and to
the most intimate of them sometimes gave not inelegant dinners.'
Hawkins's <i>Johnson</i>, p. 531. He wrote to Mrs. Thrale on Aug. 14,
1780:—'This is all that I have to tell you, except that I have three
bunches of grapes on a vine in my garden: at least this is all that I
will now tell of my garden.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 178. This house was
burnt down in 1819. <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 1st S., v. 233.</p>

<p>[1257] He said, when in Scotland, that he was <i>Johnson of that Ilk</i>.
ROSWELL. See <i>post</i>, April 28, 1778, note.</p>

<p>[1258] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 229.</p>

<p>[1259] See vol. i. p. 375. BOSWELL. Boswell refers to the work of Dr.
Cohausen of Coblentz, <i>Hermippus Redivivus</i>. Dr. Campbell translated it
(<i>ante</i>, i. 417), under the title of <i>Hermippus Redivivus, or the Sage's
Triumph over Old Age and the Grave</i>. Cohausen maintained that life might
be prolonged to 115 years by breathing the breath of healthy young
women. He founded his theory 'on a Roman inscription—<i>AEsculapio et
Sanitati L. Colodius Hermippus qui vixit annos CXV. dies V. puellarum
anhelitu</i>.' He maintained that one of the most eligible conditions of
life was that of a Confessor of youthful nuns. <i>Lowndes's Bibl. Man</i>. p.
488, and <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xiii. 279. I. D'Israeli (<i>Curiosities of
Literature</i>, ed. 1834, ii. 102) describes Campbell's book as a 'curious
banter on the hermetic philosophy and the universal medicine; the grave
irony is so closely kept up, that it deceived for a length of time the
most learned. Campbell assured a friend it was a mere <i>jeu-d'-esprit</i>.'
Lord E. Fitzmaurice (<i>Life of Shelburne</i>, iii. 447) says that
Ingenhousz, a Dutch physician who lived with Shelburne, combated in one
of his works the notion held by certain schoolmasters, that 'it was
wholesome to inhale the air which has passed through the lungs of their
pupils, closing the windows in order purposely to facilitate that
operation.'</p>

<p>[1260] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 24.</p>

<p>[1261] The privilege of perpetuating in a family an estate and arms
<i>indefeasibly</i> from generation to generation, is enjoyed by none of his
Majesty's subjects except in Scotland, where the legal fiction of <i>fine</i>
and <i>recovery</i> is unknown. It is a privilege so proud, that I should
think it would be proper to have the exercise of it dependent on the
royal prerogative. It seems absurd to permit the power of perpetuating
their representation, to men, who having had no eminent merit, have
truly no name. The King, as the impartial father of his people, would
never refuse to grant the privilege to those who deserved it. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1262] Boswell wrote to Temple about six weeks later:—'Murphy says he
has read thirty pages of Smith's <i>Wealth</i>, but says he shall read no
more; Smith, too, is now of our Club. It has lost its select merit.'
<i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 233. Johnson can scarcely have read Smith; if
he did, it made no impression on him. His ignorance on many points as to
what constitutes the wealth of a nation remained as deep as ever.</p>

<p>[1263] Mr. Wedderburne. CROKER.</p>

<p>[1264] A similar bill had been thrown out sixteen years earlier by 194
to 84. 'A Bill for a Militia in Scotland was not successful; nor could
the disaffected there obtain this mode of having their arms restored.
Pitt had acquiesced; but the young Whigs attacked it with all their
force.' Walpole's <i>Reign of George II</i>, iii. 280. Lord Mountstuart's
bill was thrown out by 112 to 95, the Ministry being in the minority.
The arguments for and against it are stated in the <i>Ann. Reg</i>. xix 140.
See <i>post</i>, iii. i. Henry Mackenzie (<i>Life of John Home</i>, i. 26)
says:—'The Poker Club was instituted at a time when Scotland was
refused a militia, and thought herself affronted by the refusal. The
name was chosen from a quaint sort of allusion to the principles it was
meant to excite, as a club to stir up the fire and spirit of the
country.' See <i>ante</i>, p. 376.</p>

<p>[1265] 'Scotland paid only one fortieth to the land-tax, the very
specific tax out of which all the expenses of a militia were to be
drawn.' <i>Ann. Reg</i>. xix. 141.</p>

<p>[1266] In a new edition of this book, which was published in the
following year, the editor states, that either 'through hurry or
inattention some obscene jests had unluckily found a place in the first
edition.' See <i>post</i>, April 28, 1778.</p>

<p>[1267] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 338, note 2.</p>

<p>[1268] The number of the asterisks, taken with the term <i>worthy friend</i>,
renders it almost certain that Langton was meant. The story might,
however, have been told of Reynolds, for he wrote of Johnson:—'Truth,
whether in great or little matters, he held sacred. From the violation
of truth, he said, in great things your character or your interest was
affected; in lesser things, your pleasure is equally destroyed. I
remember, on his relating some incident, I added something to his
relation which I supposed might likewise have happened: "It would have
been a better story," says he, "if it had been so; but it was not."'
Taylor's <i>Reynolds</i>, ii. 457. Mrs. Piozzi records (<i>Anec</i>. p. 116):—'"A
story," says Johnson, "is a specimen of human manners, and derives its
sole value from its truth, When Foote has told me something, I dismiss
it from my mind like a passing shadow; when Reynolds tells me something,
I consider myself as possessed of an idea the more."'</p>

<p>[1269] Boswell felt this when, more than eight years earlier, he
wrote:—'As I have related Paoli's remarkable sayings, I declare upon
honour that I have neither added nor diminished; nay, so scrupulous have
I been, that I would not make the smallest variation, even when my
friends thought it would be an improvement. I know with how much
pleasure we read what is perfectly authentick.' Boswell's <i>Corsia</i>, ed.
1879, p. 126. See <i>post</i>, iii. 209.</p>

<p>[1270] In his <i>Life of Browne</i> (<i>Works</i>, vi. 478) he sayd of 'innocent
frauds':—'But no fraud is innocent; for the confidence which makes the
happiness of society is in some degree diminished by every man whose
practice is at variance with his words.' 'Mr. Tyers,' writes Murphy
(<i>Life</i>, p. 146), 'observed that Dr. Johnson always talked as if he was
talking upon oath.' Compared with Johnson's strictness, Rouseau's laxity
is striking. After describing 'ces gens qu'on appelle vrais dans le
monde,' he continues;—'L'homme que j'appele <i>vrai</i> fait tout le
contraire. En choses parfaitnement indifferentes la vérité qu'alors
l'autre respecte si fort le touche fort peu, et il ne se fera guére de
scrupule d'amuser une compagnie par des faits controuvé, dont il ne
résulte aucun jugement injuste ni pour ni contre qui que ce soit vivant
ou mort.' <i>Les Réveries: IVine Promenade</i>.</p>

<p>[1271] No doubt Mrs. Fermor (<i>ante</i>, p. 392.)</p>

<p>[1272] No. 110.</p>

<p>[1273] No. 52.</p>

<p>[1274] But see <i>ante</i>, ii. 365, and Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 19.</p>

<p>[1275] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 8, and <i>post</i>, April 7, 1778.</p>

<p>[1276] Three weeks later, at his usual fast before Easter, Johnson
recorded:—'I felt myself very much disordered by emptiness, and called
for tea with peevish and impatient eagerness.' <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 147.</p>

<p>[1277] Of the use of spirituous liquors, he wrote (<i>Works</i>, vi.
26):—'The mischiefs arising on every side from this compendious mode of
drunkenness are enormous and insupportable, equally to be found among
the great and the mean; filling palaces with disquiet and distraction,
harder to be borne as it cannot be mentioned, and overwhelming
multitudes with incurable diseases and unpitied poverty.' Yet he found
an excuse for drunkenness which few men but he could have found.
Stockdale (<i>Memoirs</i>, ii. 189) says that he heard Mrs. Williams 'wonder
what pleasure men can take in making beasts of themselves. "I wonder,
Madam," replied Johnson, "that you have not penetration enough to see
the strong inducement to this excess; for he who makes a beast of
himself gets rid of the pain of being a man."'</p>

<p>[1278] Very likely Boswell. See <i>post</i>, under May 8, 1781, for a like
instance. In 1775, under a yew tree, he promised Temple to be sober. On
Aug. 12, 1775, he wrote:—'My promise under the solemn yew I have
observed wonderfully, having never infringed it till, the other day, a
very jovial company of us dined at a tavern, and I unwarily exceeded my
bottle of old Hock; and having once broke over the pale, I run wild, but
I did not get drunk. I was, however, intoxicated, and very ill next
day.' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 209. During his present visit to London
he wrote:—'My promise under the solemn yew was not religiously kept,
because a little wine hurried me on too much. The General [Paoli] has
taken my word of honour that I shall not taste fermented liquor for a
year, that I may recover sobriety. I have kept this promise now about
three weeks. I was really growing a drunkard.' <i>Ib</i> p. 233. In 1778 he
was for a short time a water drinker. <i>Post</i>, April 28, 1778. His
intemperance grew upon him, and at last carried him off. On Dec. 4,
1790, he wrote to Malone:—'Courtenay took my word and honour that till
March 1 my allowance of wine per diem should not exceed four good
glasses at dinner, and a pint after it, and this I have kept, though I
have dined with Jack Wilkes, &amp;c. On March 8, 1791, he wrote:—'Your
friendly admonition as to excess in wine <i>has</i> been often too
applicable. As I am now free from my restriction to Courtenay, I shall
be much upon my guard; for, to tell the truth, I did go too deep the day
before yesterday.' Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, pp. 828, 829.</p>

<p>[1279] 'Mathematics are perhaps too much studied at our universities.
This seems a science to which the meanest intellects are equal. I forget
who it is that says, "All men might understand mathematics if they
would."' Goldsmith's <i>Present Stale of Polite Learning</i>, ch. 13.</p>

<p>[1280] 'No, Sir,' he once said, 'people are not born with a particular
genius for particular employments or studies, for it would be like
saying that a man could see a great way east, but could not west. It is
good sense applied with diligence to what was at first a mere accident,
and which by great application grew to be called by the generality of
mankind a particular genius.' Miss Reynolds's <i>Recollections</i>. Croker's
<i>Boswell</i>, p. 833:—'Perhaps this is Miss Reynolds's recollection of the
following, in Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 15, 1773':—JOHNSON. 'I could
as easily apply to law as to tragick poetry.' BOSWELL. 'Yet, Sir, you
did apply to tragick poetry, not to law.' JOHNSON. 'Because, Sir, I had
not money to study law. Sir, the man who has vigour may walk to the east
just as well as to the west, if he happens to turn his head that way.'
'The true genius,' he wrote (<i>Works</i>, vii. 1), 'is a mind of large
general powers, accidentally determined to some particular direction.'
Reynolds held the same doctrine, having got it no doubt from Johnson. He
held 'that the superiority attainable in any pursuit whatever does not
originate in an innate propensity of the mind to that pursuit in
particular, but depends on the general strength of the intellect, and on
the intense and constant application of that strength to a specific
purpose. He regarded ambition as the cause of eminence, but accident as
pointing out the <i>means</i>.' Northcote's <i>Reynolds</i>, i. II. 'Porson
insisted that all men are born with abilities nearly equal. "Any one,"
he would say, "might become quite as good a critic as I am, if he would
only take the trouble to make himself so. I have made myself what I am
by intense labour."' Rogers's <i>Table Talk</i>, p. 305. Hume maintained the
opposite. 'This forenoon,' wrote Boswell on June 19, 1775, 'Mr. Hume
came in. He did not say much. I only remember his remark, that
characters depend more on original formation than on the way we are
educated; "for," said he, "princes are educated uniformly, and yet how
different are they! how different was James the Second from Charles the
Second!"' <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 205. Boswell recorded, two years
earlier (<i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 16):—'Dr. Johnson denied that any child was
better than another, but by difference of instruction; though, in
consequence of greater attention being paid to instruction by one child
than another, and of a variety of imperceptible causes, such as
instruction being counteracted by servants, a notion was conceived that,
of two children equally well educated, one was naturally much worse
than another.'</p>

<p>[1281] See <i>ante</i>, i. 348.</p>

<p>[1282] The grossness of naval men is shewn in Captain Mirvan, in Miss
Burney's <i>Evelina</i>. In her <i>Diary</i>, i. 358, she records:—'The more I
see of sea-captains the less reason I have to be ashamed of Captain
Mirvan, for they have all so irresistible a propensity to wanton
mischief—to roasting beaus and detesting old women, that I quite
rejoice I shewed the book to no one ere printed, lest I should have been
prevailed upon to soften his character.'</p>

<p>[1283] Baretti, in a MS. note in <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 349, describes
Gwyn as 'the Welsh architect that built the bridge at Oxford.' He built
Magdalen Bridge.</p>

<p>[1284] 'Whence,' asks Goldsmith, 'has proceeded the vain magnificence of
expensive architecture in our colleges? Is it that men study to more
advantage in a palace than in a cell? One single performance of taste or
genius confers more real honour on its parent university than all the
labours of the chisel.' <i>Present State of Polite Learning</i>, ch. 13.
Newton used to say of his friend, the Earl of Pembroke, 'that he was a
lover of stone dolls.' Brewster's <i>Newton</i>, ed. 1860, ii. 334.</p>

<p>[1285] Afterwards Lord Stowell. See the beginning of Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>.</p>

<p>[1286] See <i>ante</i>, i. 446.</p>

<p>[1287] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 121, and <i>post</i>, Oct. 27, 1779.</p>

<p>[1288] See <i>ante</i>, p. 424.</p>

<p>[1289] See <i>post</i>, under April 4, 1781.</p>

<p>[1290] See <i>ante</i>, p. 315.</p>

<p>[1291] See <i>ante</i>, i. 398.</p>

<p>[1292] 'Hume told Cadell, the bookseller, that he had a great desire to
be introduced to as many of the persons who had written against him as
could be collected. Accordingly, Dr. Douglas, Dr. Adams, &amp;c., were
invited by Cadell to dine at his house, in order to meet Hume. They
came; and Dr. Price, who was of the party, assured me that they were all
delighted with David.' Rogers's <i>Table Talk</i>, p. 106.</p>

<p>[1293] Boswell, in his <i>Corsica</i>, ed. 1879, p. 204, uses a strange
argument against infidelity. 'Belief is favourable to the human mind
were it for nothing else but to furnish it entertainment. An infidel, I
should think, must frequently suffer from ennui.' In his <i>Hebrides</i>,
Aug. 15, note, he attacks Adam Smith for being 'so forgetful of <i>human
comfort</i> as to give any countenance to that dreary infidelity which
would "make us poor indeed."'</p>

<p>[1294] 'JEMMY TWITCHER. Are we more dishonest than the rest of mankind?
What we win, gentlemen, is our own, by the law of arms and the right of
conquest. CROOK-FINGER'D JACK. Where shall we find such another set of
practical philosophers, who to a man are above the fear of death?' <i>The
Beggar's Opera</i>, act ii. sc. i.</p>

<p>[1295] Boswell, I think, here aims a blow at Gibbon. He says (<i>post</i>,
under March 19, 1781), that 'Johnson had talked with some disgust of Mr.
Gibbon's ugliness.' He wrote to Temple on May 8, 1779:—'Gibbon is an
ugly, affected, disgusting fellow, and poisons our literary club to me.'
He had before classed him among 'infidel wasps and venomous insects.'
<i>Letters of Boswell</i>, pp. 233, 242. The younger Coleman describes Gibbon
as dressed 'in a suit of flowered velvet, with a bag and sword.' <i>Random
Records</i>, i. 121.</p>

<p>[1296] 'Formam quidem ipsam, Marce fili, et tamquam faciem honesti
vides, "quae si oculis cerneretur, mirabiles amores" ut ait Plato,
"excitaret sapientiae."' Cicero, De <i>Off</i>. i. 5.</p>

<p>[1297] Of Beattie's attack on Hume, he said:—'Treating your adversary
with respect, is striking soft in a battle.' Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>,
Aug. 15.</p>

<p>[1298] When Gibbon entered Magdalen College in 1752, the ordinary
commoners were already excluded. 'As a gentleman commoner,' he writes,
'I was admitted to the society of the fellows, and fondly expected that
some questions of literature would be the amusing and instructive topics
of their discourse. Their conversation stagnated in a round of college
business, Tory politics, personal anecdotes, and private scandal; their
dull and deep potations excused the brisk intemperance of youth; and
their constitutional toasts were not expressive of the most lively
loyalty for the house of Hanover.' Gibbon's <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 53. In
Jesse's edition of White's <i>Selborne</i>, p. ii, it is stated that 'White,
as long as his health allowed him, always attended the annual election
of Fellows at Oriel College, where the gentlemen-commoners were allowed
the use of the common-room after dinner. This liberty they seldom
availed themselves of, except on the occasion of Mr. White's visits; for
such was his happy manner of telling a story that the room was always
filled when he was there.' He died in 1793.</p>

<p>[1299] 'So different are the colours of life as we look forward to the
future, or backward to the past, and so different the opinions and
sentiments which this contrariety of appearance naturally produces, that
the conversation of the old and young ends generally with contempt or
pity on either side…. One generation is always the scorn and wonder of
the other; and the notions of the old and young are like liquors of
different gravity and texture which never can unite.' <i>The Rambler</i>,
No. 69.</p>

<p>[1300] 'It was said of a dispute between two mathematicians, "<i>malim cum
Scaligero errare quam cum Clavio recte sapere</i>" that "it was more
eligible to go wrong with one than right with the other." A tendency of
the same kind every mind must feel at the perusal of Dryden's prefaces
and Rymer's discourses.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, vii. 303.</p>

<p>[1301] 'There is evidence of Phil. Jones's love of beer; for we find
scribbled at the end of the college buttery-books, "O yes, O yes, come
forth, Phil. Jones, and answer to your charge for exceeding the
batells." His excess, perhaps, was in liquor.' <i>Dr. Johnson: His
Friends, &amp;c</i>., p. 23.</p>

<p>[1302] See <i>post</i>, iii. 1.</p>

<p>[1303] Dr. Fisher, who was present, told Mr. Croker that 'he recollected
one passage of the conversation. Boswell quoted <i>Quern Deus vult
perdere, prius dementat</i>, and asked where it was. A pause. At last Dr.
Chandler said, in Horace. Another pause. Then Fisher remarked that he
knew of no metre in Horace to which the words could be reduced: and
Johnson said dictatorially, "The young man is right."' See <i>post</i>, March
30, 1783. For another of Dr. Fisher's anecdotes, see <i>ante</i>, p. 269.
Mark Pattison recorded in his <i>Diary</i> in 1843 (<i>Memoirs</i>, p. 203), on
the authority of Mr. (now Cardinal) Newman:—'About 1770, the worst time
in the University; a head of Oriel then, who was continually obliged to
be assisted to bed by his butler. Gaudies, a scene of wild license. At
Christ Church they dined at three, and sat regularly till chapel at
nine.' A gaudy is such a festival as the one in the text.</p>

<p>[1304] The author of the <i>Commentary on the Psalms</i>. See Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 15, note.</p>

<p>[1305] See <i>ante</i>, pp. 279, 283.</p>

<p>[1306] 'I have seen,' said Mr. Donne to Sir R. Drewry, 'a dreadful
vision since I saw you. I have seen my dear wife pass twice by me,
through this room, with her hair hanging about her shoulders, and a dead
child in her arms.' He learnt that on the same day, and about the very
hour, after a long and dangerous labour, she had been delivered of a
dead child. Walton's <i>Life of Dr. Donne</i>, ed. 1838, p. 25.</p>

<p>[1307] 'Biographers so little regard the manners or behaviour of their
heroes, that more knowledge may be gained of a man's real character by a
short conversation with one of his servants than from a formal and
studied narrative, begun with his pedigree, and ended with his funeral.'
<i>The Rambler</i>, No. 60. See <i>post</i>, iii. 71.</p>

<p>[1308] See <i>post</i>, iii. 112.</p>

<p>[1309] It has been mentioned to me by an accurate English friend, that
Dr. Johnson could never have used the phrase <i>almost nothing</i>, as not
being English; and therefore I have put another in its place. At the
same time, I am not quite convinced it is not good English. For the best
writers use the phrase '<i>Little or nothing</i>;' i.e. almost so little as
to be nothing. BOSWELL. Boswell might have left <i>almost nothing</i> in his
text. Johnson used it in his writings, certainly twice. 'It will add
<i>almost nothing</i> to the expense.' Works, v. 307. 'I have read little,
<i>almost nothing</i>.' <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 176. Moreover, in a letter to Mrs.
Aston, written on Nov. 5, 1779 (Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 640), he
says:—'Nothing almost is purchased.' In <i>King Lear</i>, act ii. sc. 2,
we have:—</p>

<p>'Nothing almost sees miracles But misery.'</p>

<p>[1310] 'Pope's fortune did not suffer his charity to be splendid and
conspicuous; but he assisted Dodsley with a hundred pounds, that he
might open a shop.' Johnson's <i>Works</i>, viii. 318.</p>

<p>[1311] <i>A Muse in Livery: or the Footman's Miscellany</i>. 1732. A rhyme in
the motto on the title-page shows what a Cockney muse Dodsley's was.
He writes:—</p>

<p>'But when I mount behind the coach,<br/>

And bear aloft a flaming torch.'<br/>
</p>

<p>The Preface is written with much good feeling.</p>

<p>[1312] James Dodsley, many years a bookseller in Pall Mall. He died Feb.
19, 1797. P. CUNNINGHAM. He was living, therefore, when this anecdote
was published.</p>

<p>[1313] Horace Walpole (<i>Letters</i>, iii. 135) says:—'You know how decent,
humble, inoffensive a creature Dodsley is; how little apt to forget or
disguise his having been a footman.' Johnson seems to refer to Dodsley
in the following passage, written in 1756 (<i>Works</i>, v. 358):—'The last
century imagined that a man composing in his chariot was a new object of
curiosity; but how much would the wonder have been increased by a
footman studying behind it.'</p>

<p>[1314] See <i>ante</i>, i. 417.</p>

<p>[1315] Yet surely it is a very useful work, and of wonderful research
and labour for one man to have executed. BOSWELL. See Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 17, 1773.</p>

<p>[1316] Two days earlier, Hume congratulated Gibbon on the first volume
of his <i>Decline and Fall</i>:—'I own that if I had not previously had the
happiness of your personal acquaintance, such a performance from an
Englishman in our age would have given me some surprise. You may smile
at this sentiment, but as it seems to me that your countrymen, for
almost a whole generation, have given themselves up to barbarous and
absurd faction, and have totally neglected all polite letters, I no
longer expected any valuable production ever to come from them.' J. H.
Burton's <i>Hume</i>, ii. 484.</p>

<p>[1317] Five weeks later Boswell used a different metaphor. 'I think it
is right that as fast as infidel wasps or venomous insects, whether
creeping or flying, are hatched, they should be crushed.' <i>Letters of
Boswell</i>, p. 232. If the infidels were wasps to the orthodox, the
orthodox were hornets to the infidels. Gibbon wrote (<i>Misc. Works</i>, i.
273):—'The freedom of my writings has indeed provoked an implacable
tribe; but as I was safe from the stings, I was soon accustomed to the
buzzing of the hornets.'</p>

<p>[1318] Macaulay thus examines this report (<i>Essays</i>, i. 360):—'To what
then, it has been asked, could Johnson allude? Possibly to some anecdote
or some conversation of which all trace is lost. One conjecture may be
offered, though with diffidence. Gibbon tells us in his memoirs [<i>Misc.
Works</i>, i. 56] that at Oxford he took a fancy for studying Arabic, and
was prevented from doing so by the remonstrances of his tutor. Soon
after this, the young man fell in with Bossuet's controversial writings,
and was speedily converted by them to the Roman Catholic faith. The
apostasy of a gentleman-commoner would of course be for a time the chief
subject of conversation in the common room of Magdalene. His whim about
Arabic learning would naturally be mentioned, and would give occasion to
some jokes about the probability of his turning Mussulman. If such jokes
were made, Johnson, who frequently visited Oxford, was very likely to
hear of them.' Though Gibbon's <i>Autobiography</i> ends with the year 1788,
yet he wrote portions of it, I believe, after the publication of the
<i>Life of Johnson</i>. (See <i>ante</i>, ii. 8, note 1.) I have little doubt that
in the following lines he refers to the attack thus made on him by
Boswell and Johnson. 'Many years afterwards, when the name of Gibbon was
become as notorious as that of Middleton, it was industriously whispered
at Oxford that the historian had formerly "turned Papist;" my character
stood exposed to the reproach of inconstancy.' Gibbon's <i>Misc.
Works</i>, i. 65.</p>

<p>[1319] Steele, in his <i>Apology for Himself and his Writings</i> (ed. 1714,
p. 80), says of himself:—'He first became an author when an ensign of
the Guards, a way of life exposed to much irregularity, and being
thoroughly convinced of many things of which he often repented, and
which he more often repeated, he writ, for his own private use, a little
book called the <i>Christian Hero</i>, with a design principally to fix upon
his own mind a strong impression of virtue and religion, in opposition
to a stronger propensity towards unwarrantable pleasures. This secret
admonition was too weak; he therefore printed the book with his name, in
hopes that a standing testimony against himself, and the eyes of the
world, that is to say of his acquaintance, upon him in a new light,
might curb his desires, and make him ashamed of understanding and
seeming to feel what was virtuous, and living so quite contrary a life.'</p>

<p>[1320] 'A man,' no doubt, is Boswell himself.</p>

<p>[1321] '"I was sure when I read it that the preface to Baretti's
<i>Dialogues</i> was Dr. Johnson's; and that I made him confess." "Baretti's
<i>Dialogues</i>! What are they about?" "A thimble, and a spoon, and a knife,
and a fork! They are the most absurd, and yet the most laughable things
you ever saw. They were written for Miss Thrale, and all the dialogues
are between her and him, except now and then a shovel and a poker, or a
goose and a chair happen to step in."' Mme. D'Arblay's <i>Diary</i>, ii. 263.</p>

<p>[1322] 'April 4, 1760. At present nothing is talked of, nothing admired,
but what I cannot help calling a very insipid and tedious performance;
it is a kind of novel called <i>The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy</i>;
the great humour of which consists in the whole narration always going
backwards.' Walpole's <i>Letters</i>, iii. 298. 'March 7, 1761. The second
and third volumes of <i>Tristram Shandy</i>, the dregs of nonsense, have
universally met the contempt they deserve.' <i>Ib</i> 382. '"My good friend,"
said Dr. Farmer (<i>ante</i>, i. 368), one day in the parlour at Emanuel
College, "you young men seem very fond of this <i>Tristram Shandy</i>; but
mark my words, however much it may be talked about at present, yet,
depend upon it, in the course of twenty years, should any one wish to
refer to it, he will be obliged to go to an antiquary to inquire for
it."' Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, ed. 1844, ii. 339. See <i>ante</i>, ii. 173, note
2, and 222.</p>

<p>[1323] Mrs. Rudd. She and the two brothers Perreau were charged with
forgery. She was tried first and acquitted, the verdict of the jury
being 'not guilty, according to the evidence before us.' The <i>Ann. Reg</i>.
xviii. 231, adds:—'There were the loudest applauses on this acquittal
almost ever known in a court of justice.' 'The issue of Mrs. Rudd's
trial was thought to involve the fate of the Perreaus; and the popular
fancy had taken the part of the woman as against the men.' They were
convicted and hanged, protesting their innocence. <i>Letters of Boswell</i>,
pp. 223-230. Boswell wrote to Temple on April 28:—'You know my
curiosity and love of adventure; I have got acquainted with the
celebrated Mrs. Rudd.' <i>Ib</i> P. 233—Three days later, he wrote:—
'Perhaps the adventure with Mrs. Rudd is very foolish, notwithstanding
Dr. Johnson's approbation.' <i>Ib</i> p. 235. See <i>post</i>, iii. 79, and
April 28, 1778.</p>

<p>[1324] See <i>post</i>, May 15, 1784, where Johnson says that Mrs. Montagu
has 'a constant <i>stream</i> of conversation,' and a second time allows that
'Burke is an extraordinary man.' Johnson writes of 'a <i>stream</i> of
melody.' Works, viii. 92. For Burke's conversation see <i>post</i>, April 7,
1778, 1780 in Mr. Langton's <i>Collection</i>, March 21, 1783, and Boswell's
<i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 15.</p>

<p>[1325] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 16.</p>

<p>[1326] According to Boswell's record in <i>Boswelliana</i>, p. 273, two
sayings are here united. He there writes, on the authority of Mr.
Langton:—'Dr. Johnson had a very high opinion of Edmund Burke. He said,
"That fellow calls forth all my powers"; and once when he was out of
spirits and rather dejected he said, "Were I to see Burke now 'twould
kill me."'</p>

<p>[1327] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 100, iii. 24, and under May 8, 1781.</p>

<p>[1328] In a note on the <i>Dunciad</i>, ii. 50, the author of this epigram is
said to be Dr. Evans.</p>

<p>[1329] Capability Brown, as he was called. See <i>post</i>, Oct. 30, 1779.</p>

<p>[1330] Such an 'impudent dog' had Boswell himself been in Corsica.
'Before I was accustomed to the Corsican hospitality,' he wrote. 'I
sometimes forgot myself, and imagining I was in a publick house, called
for what I wanted, with the tone which one uses in calling to the
waiters at a tavern. I did so at Pino, asking for a variety of things at
once, when Signora Tomasi perceiving my mistake, looked in my face and
smiled, saying with much calmness and good nature, "una cosa dopo un
altra, Signore. One thing after another, Sir."' Boswell's <i>Corsica</i>, ed.
1879, p. 151. A Corsican gentleman, who knows the Tomasi family, told me
that this reply is preserved among them by tradition.</p>

<p>[1331] Sir John Hawkins has preserved very few <i>Memorabilia</i> of Johnson.
There is, however, to be found, in his bulky tome [p. 87], a very
excellent one upon this subject:—'In contradiction to those, who,
having a wife and children, prefer domestick enjoyments to those which a
tavern affords, I have heard him assert, <i>that a tavern chair was the
throne of human felicity</i>.—"As soon," said he, "as I enter the door of
a tavern, I experience an oblivion of care, and a freedom from
solicitude: when I am seated, I find the master courteous, and the
servants obsequious to my call; anxious to know and ready to supply my
wants: wine there exhilarates my spirits, and prompts me to free
conversation and an interchange of discourse with those whom I most
love: I dogmatise and am contradicted, and in this conflict of opinions
and sentiments I find delight."' BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1332] We happened to lie this night at the inn at Henley, where
Shenstone wrote these lines. BOSWELL. I give them as they are found in
the corrected edition of his Works, published after his death. In
Dodsley's collection the stanza ran thus:—</p>

<p>'Whoe'er has travell'd life's dull round,<br/>

Whate'er his <i>various tour has</i> been,<br/>

May sigh to think <i>how oft</i> he found<br/>

His warmest welcome at an Inn.' BOSWELL.<br/>
</p>

<p>[1333] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 29.</p>

<p>[1334] See Shenstone's <i>Works</i>, iii. 311. Rev. Richard Graves, author of
<i>The Spiritual Quixote</i>. He and Shenstone were fellow-students at
Pembroke College, Oxford.</p>

<p>[1335] 'He too often makes use of the <i>abstract</i> for the <i>concrete</i>.'
SHENSTONE. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1336] 'I asked him why he doated on a coach so, and received for
answer, that in the first place the company was shut in with him
<i>there</i>, and could not escape as out of a room; in the next place he
heard all that was said in a carriage, where it was my turn to be deaf.'
Piozzi's <i>Anec</i>. p. 276. See <i>post</i>, iii, 5, 162. Gibbon, at the end of
a journey in a post-chaise, wrote (<i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 408):—'I am always
so much delighted and improved with this union of easeand motion, that,
were not the expense enormous, I would travel every year some hundred
miles, more especially in England.'</p>

<p>[1337] Johnson (<i>Works</i>, viii. 406) tells the following 'ludicrous
story' of <i>The Fleece</i>. 'Dodsley the bookseller was one day mentioning
it to a critical visitor with more expectation of success than the other
could easily admit. In the conversation the author's age was asked; and,
being represented as advanced in life, "He will," said the critic, "be
buried in woollen."' To encourage the trade in wool, an Act was passed
requiring the dead to be buried in woollen, Burke refers to this when he
says of Lord Chatham, who was swathed in flannel owing to the gout:—
'Like a true obeyer of the laws, he will be buried in woollen.' Burke's
<i>Corres</i>, ii. 201. Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 231) says:—'A portrait of Samuel
Dyer [see <i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton's <i>Collection</i>] was painted by
Sir Joshua, and from it a mezzotinto was scraped; the print whereof, as
he was little known, sold only to his friends. A singular use was made
of it; Bell, the publisher of <i>The English Poets</i>, caused an engraving
to be made from it, and prefixed it to the poems of Mr. John Dyer.'</p>

<p>[1338] Such is this little laughable incident, which has been often
related. Dr. Percy, the Bishop of Dromore, who was an intimate friend of
Dr. Grainger, and has a particular regard for his memory, has
communicated to me the following explanation:—</p>

<p>'The passage in question was originally not liable to such a perversion;
for the authour having occasion in that part of his work to mention the
havock made by rats and mice, had introduced the subject in a kind of
mock heroick, and a parody of Homer's battle of the frogs and mice,
invoking the Muse of the old Grecian bard in an elegant and well-turned
manner. In that state I had seen it; but afterwards, unknown to me and
other friends, he had been persuaded, contrary to his own better
judgement, to alter it, so as to produce the unlucky effect
above-mentioned.'</p>

<p>The above was written by the Bishop when he had not the Poem itself to
recur to; and though the account given was true of it at one period, yet
as Dr. Grainger afterwards altered the passage in question, the remarks
in the text do not now apply to the printed poem.</p>

<p>The Bishop gives this character of Dr. Grainger:—'He was not only a man
of genius and learning, but had many excellent virtues; being one of the
most generous, friendly, and benevolent men I ever knew.' BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1339] Dr. Johnson said to me, 'Percy, Sir, was angry with me for
laughing at <i>The Sugar-cane</i>: for he had a mind to make a great thing of
Grainger's rats.' BOSWELL. Johnson helped Percy in writing a review of
this poem in 1764 (<i>ante</i>, i. 481).</p>

<p>[1340] In <i>Poems</i> by Christopher Smart, ed. 1752, p. 100. One line may
serve as a sample of the whole poem, Writing of 'Bacchus, God of hops,'
the poet says:—</p>

<p>''Tis he shall gen'rate the buxom beer.'</p>

<p>[1341] See Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 22.</p>

<p>[1342] Henley in Arden, thirteen miles from Birmingham.</p>

<p>[1343] Mr. Hector's house was in the Square—now known as the Old
Square. It afterwards formed a part of the Stork Hotel, but it was
pulled down when Corporation Street was made. A marble tablet had been
placed on the house at the suggestion of the late Mr. George Dawson,
marking the spot where 'Edmund Hector was the host, Samuel Johnson the
guest.' This tablet, together with the wainscoting, the door, and the
mantelpiece of one of the rooms, was set up in Aston Hall, at the
Johnson Centenary, in a room that is to be known as Dr. Johnson's Room.</p>

<p>[1344] My worthy friend Mr. Langton, to whom I am under innumerable
obligations in the course of my Johnsonian History, has furnished me
with a droll illustration about this question. An honest carpenter,
after giving some anecdote in his presence of the ill-treatment which he
had received from a clergyman's wife, who was a noted termagant, and
whom he accused of unjust dealing in some transaction with him, added,
'I took care to let her know what I thought of her.' And being asked,
'What did you say?' answered, 'I told her she was a <i>scoundrel</i>.'
BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1345] 'As to the baptism of infants, it is a mere human tradition, for
which neither precept nor practice is to be found in all the Scripture.'
Barclay's <i>Apology</i>, Proposition xii, ed. 1703, p. 409.</p>

<p>[1346] <i>John</i> iii. 30. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1347] Mr. Seward (<i>Anec</i>. ii. 223) says that 'Dr. Johnson always
supposed that Mr. Richardson had Mr. Nelson in his thoughts when he
delineated the character of Sir Charles Grandison.' Robert Nelson was
born in 1656, and died in 1715.</p>

<p>[1348] 'Mr. Arkwright pronounced Johnson to be the only person who on a
first view understood both the principle and powers of machinery.'
Johnson's <i>Works</i> (1787), xi. 215. Arthur Young, who visited Birmingham
in 1768, writes:—'I was nowhere more disappointed than at Birmingham,
where I could not gain any intelligence even of the most common nature,
through the excessive jealousy of the manufacturers. It seems the French
have carried off several of their fabricks, and thereby injured the town
not a little. This makes them so cautious that they will show strangers
scarce anything.' <i>Tour through the North of England</i>, iii. 279.</p>

<p>[1349] Johnson wrote to Mrs. Thrale (year not given):—'I have passed
one day at Birmingham with my old friend Hector—there's a name—and his
sister, an old love. My mistress is grown much older than my friend,</p>

<p>—-"O quid habes illius, illius<br/>

Quae spirabat amores<br/>

Quae me surpuerat mihi."'<br/>
</p>

<p>'Of her, of her what now remains,<br/>

Who breathed the loves, who<br/>

charmed the swains,<br/>

And snatched me from my heart?'<br/>
</p>

<p>FRANCIS, Horace, <i>Odes</i>, iv. 13. 18. <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 290.</p>

<p>[1350] Some years later he wrote:—'Mrs. Careless took me under her
care, and told me when I had tea enough.' <i>Ib</i>. ii. 205.</p>

<p>[1351] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 362, note 3.</p>

<p>[1352] Johnson, in a letter to Hector, on March 7 of this year,
described Congreve as 'very dull, very valetudinary, and very recluse,
willing, I am afraid, to forget the world, and content to be forgotten
by it, to repose in that sullen sensuality into which men naturally sink
who think disease a justification of indulgence, and converse only with
those who hope to prosper by indulging them … Infirmity will come, but
let us not invite it; indulgence will allure us, but let us turn
resolutely away. Time cannot always be defeated, but let us not yield
till we are conquered.' <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S., iii. 401.</p>

<p>[1353] In the same letter he said:—'I hope dear Mrs. Careless is well,
and now and then does not disdain to mention my name. It is happy when a
brother and sister live to pass their time at our age together. I have
nobody to whom I can talk of my first years—when I do to Lichfield, I
see the old places but find nobody that enjoyed them with me.'</p>

<p>[1354] I went through the house where my illustrious friend was born,
with a reverence with which it doubtless will long be visited. An
engraved view of it, with the adjacent buildings, is in <i>The Gent. Mag</i>.
for Feb. 1875. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1355] The scene of Farquhar's <i>Beaux Stratagem</i> is laid in Lichfield.
The passage in which the ale is praised begins as follows:—</p>

<p>'<i>Aimwell</i>. I have heard your town of Lichfield much famed for ale; I
think I'll taste that.</p>

<p>'<i>Boniface</i>, Sir, I have now in my cellar ten tun of the best ale in
Staffordshire; 'tis smooth as oil, sweet as milk, clear as amber, and
strong as brandy; and will be just fourteen year old the fifth day of
next March, old style.' Act i. sc. i. See <i>post</i>, April 20, 1781.</p>

<p>[1356] Though his letters to her are very affectionate, yet what he
wrote of her to Mrs. Thrale shews that her love for him was not strong.
Thus he writes:—'July 20, 1767. Miss Lucy is more kind and civil than I
expected.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 4. 'July 17, 1771. Lucy is a
philosopher, and considers me as one of the external and accidental
things that are to be taken and left without emotion. If I could learn
of Lucy, would it be better? Will you teach me?' <i>Ib</i> p. 46. 'Aug. 1,
1775. This was to have been my last letter from this place, but Lucy
says I must not go this week. Fits of tenderness with Mrs. Lucy are not
common, but she seems now to have a little paroxysm, and I was not
willing to counteract it.' <i>Ib</i> p. 293. 'Oct. 27, 1781. Poor Lucy's
illness has left her very deaf, and I think, very inarticulate … But
she seems to like me better than she did.' <i>Ib</i> ii. 208. 'Oct. 31, 1781.
Poor Lucy's health is very much broken … Her mental powers are not
impaired, and her social virtues seem to increase. She never was so
civil to me before.' <i>Ib</i> p. 211. On his mother's death he had written
to her:—'Every heart must lean to somebody, and I have nobody but you.'
<i>Ante</i> i. 515.</p>

<p>[1357] See <i>ante</i>, p. 311.</p>

<p>[1358] See <i>post</i>, iii. 131.</p>

<p>[1359] Boswell varies Johnson's definition, which was 'a grain which in
England is generally given to horses, but in Scotland supports the
people.' <i>ante</i>, i. 294, note 8.</p>

<p>[1360] '"I remember," said Dr. Johnson, "when all the <i>decent</i> people in
Lichfield got drunk every night."' Boswell's <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 19. See
<i>post</i>, iii. 77.</p>

<p>[1361] He had to allow that in literature they were behind the age.
Nearly four years after the publication of <i>Evelina</i>, he
wrote:—'Whatever Burney [by Burney he meant Miss Burney] may think of
the celerity of fame, the name of <i>Evelina</i> had never been heard at
Lichfield till I brought it. I am afraid my dear townsmen will be
mentioned in future days as the last part of this nation that was
civilised. But the days of darkness are soon to be at an end; the
reading society ordered it to be procured this week.' <i>Piozzi
Letters</i>, ii. 221.</p>

<p>[1362] See <i>ante</i>, ii. 159.</p>

<p>[1363] Garrick himself, like the Lichfieldians, always said—<i>shupreme,
shuperior</i>. BURNEY.</p>

<p>[1364] Johnson did not always speak so disrespectfully of Birmingham. In
his <i>Taxation no Tyranny</i> (<i>Works</i>, vi. 228), he wrote:—'The traders of
Birmingham have rescued themselves from all imputation of narrow
selfishness by a manly recommendation to Parliament of the rights and
dignity of their native country.' The <i>boobies</i> in this case were
sound Tories.</p>

<p>[1365] This play was Gibber's <i>Hob; or The Country Wake</i>, with
additions, which in its turn was Dogget's <i>Country Wake</i> reduced. Reed's
<i>Biog. Dram</i>. ii. 307.</p>

<p>[1366] Boswell says, <i>post</i>, under Sept. 30, 1783, that 'Johnson had
thought more upon the subject of acting than might be generally
supposed.'</p>

<p>[1367] A nice observer of the female form. CROKER. Terence, <i>Eun</i>. iii.
5.</p>

<p>[1368] In Farquhar's Comedy of <i>Sir Harry Wildair</i>.</p>

<p>[1369] Gilbert Walmesley, <i>ante</i>, i. 81</p>

<p>[1370] See <i>ante</i>, i. 83.</p>

<p>[1371] Cradock (<i>Memoirs</i> i. 74) says that in the Cathedral porch, a
gentleman, 'who might, perhaps, be too ambitious to be thought an
acquaintance of the great Literary Oracle, ventured to say, "Dr.
Johnson, we have had a most excellent discourse to day," to which he
replied, "That may be, Sir, but it is impossible for you to know it."'</p>

<p>[1372] <i>The Tempest</i>, act iv., sc. 1.</p>

<p>[1373] See <i>post</i>, iii. 151.</p>

<p>[1374] Johnson, in 1763, advising Miss Porter to rent a house,
said:—'You might have the Palace for twenty pounds.' Croker's
<i>Boswell</i>, p. 145.</p>

<p>[1375] Boswell, after his book was published, quarrelled with Miss
Seward. He said that he was forced to examine these communications 'with
much caution. They were tinctured with a strong prejudice against
Johnson.' His book, he continued, was meant to be 'a <i>real history</i> and
not a <i>novel</i>,' so that he had 'to suppress all erroneous particulars,
however entertaining.' He accused her of attacking Johnson with
malevolence. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. 1793, p. 1009. For Boswell's second meeting
with her, see <i>post</i>, iii. 284.</p>

<p>[1376] A Signor Recupero had noticed on Etna, the thickness of each
stratum of earth between the several strata of lava. 'He tells me,'
wrote Brydone, 'he is exceedingly embarrassed by these discoveries in
writing the history of the mountain. That Moses hangs like a dead weight
upon him, and blunts all his zeal for inquiry; for that really he has
not the conscience to make his mountain so young as that prophet makes
the world. The bishop, who is strenuously orthodox—for it is an
excellent see—has already warned him to be upon his guard, and not to
pretend to be a better natural historian than Moses.' Brydone's
<i>Tour</i>, i. 141.</p>

<p>[1377] He wrote:—'Mr. Boswell is with me, but I will take care that he
shall hinder no business, nor shall he know more than you would have
him.' Mr. Morison's <i>Collection of Autographs</i>, vol. ii.</p>

<p>[1378] 'March 23, 1776. Master Thrale, son of Mr. Thrale, member for the
Borough, suddenly before his father's door.' <i>Gent. Mag</i>. 1776, p. 142.</p>

<p>[1379] See <i>post</i>, iii. 95.</p>

<p>[1380] 'Sir,' he said, 'I would walk to the extent of the diameter of
the earth to save Beauclerk' (<i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton's
<i>Collection</i>). He had written of the boy the previous summer:—'Pray
give my service to my dear friend Harry, and tell him that Mr. Murphy
does not love him better than I do.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 262.</p>

<p>[1381] See an accurate and animated statement of Mr. Gastrel's
barbarity, by Mr. Malone, in a note on <i>Some account of the Life of
William Shakspeare</i>, prefixed to his admirable edition of that poet's
works, vol. i. p. 118. BOSWELL.</p>

<p>[1382] See Prior's <i>Life of Malone</i>, p. 142.</p>

<p>[1383] <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 307.</p>

<p>[1384] See <i>post</i>, iii. 18, note 1.</p>

<p>[1385] Mr. Hoole wrote of Johnson's last days:—'Being asked unnecessary
and frivolous questions, he said he often thought of <i>Macbeth</i> [act iii.
sc. 4]—"Question enrages him."' Croker's <i>Boswell</i>, p. 843. See <i>post</i>,
iii. 57, 268.</p>

<p>[1386] Sir Fletcher Norton, afterwards Speaker of the House of Commons,
and in 1782 created Baron Grantley. MALONE. For Norton's ignorance, see
<i>ante</i>, ii. 91. Walpole (<i>Letters</i>, iv. 124) described him as 'a tough
enemy; I don't mean in parts or argument, but one that makes an
excellent bull-dog.' When in 1770 he was made Speaker, Walpole
wrote:—'Nothing can exceed the badness of his character, even in this
bad age.' <i>Ib</i> v. 217. In his <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George III</i>, i.
240, Walpole says:—'It was known that in private causes he took money
from both parties.' Horne (afterwards Horne Tooke) charged Norton with
this practice; <i>Parl. Hist</i>. xvii. 1010; and so did Junius in his
<i>Letter</i> xxxix. Churchill, in <i>The Duellist</i> (<i>Poems</i>, ed. 1766, ii.
87), writing of him, says:—</p>

<p>'How often…
Hath he ta'en briefs on false pretence,
and undertaken the defence
of trusting fools, whom in the end
He meant to ruin, not defend.'</p>

<p>Lord Eldon said that 'he was much known by the name of Sir Bull-face
Double Fee.' He added that 'he was not a lawyer.' Twiss's <i>Eldon</i>, iii.
98. 'Acting, it was supposed from resentment, having been refused a
peerage,' he made on May 7, 1777, a bold speech to the King on
presenting the Civil List Bill. 'He told him that his faithful Commons,
labouring under burthens almost too heavy to be borne, had granted him a
very great additional revenue—great beyond example, great beyond his
Majesty's highest wants.' <i>Parl. Hist</i>. xix. 213, and Walpole's <i>Journal
of the Reign of George III</i>, ii. 113.</p>

<p>[1387] Burns's Holy Willie, like Boswell, was an Ayrshire man.</p>

<p>[1388] Johnson, on May 16, wrote of him to Mrs. Thrale:—'He has his
head as full as yours at an election. Livings and preferments, as if he
were in want with twenty children, run in his head. But a man must have
his head on something, small or great.' <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 325.</p>

<p>[1389] Johnson wrote on May 25, 1780 (<i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 136):'——
is come to town, brisk and vigorous, fierce and fell, to drive on his
lawsuit. Nothing in all life now can be more <i>profligater</i> than what he
is; and if, in case, that so be, that they persist for to resist him, he
is resolved not to spare no money, nor no time.' Taylor, no doubt, is
meant, and Baretti, in a marginal note, says:—'This was the elegant
phraseology of that Doctor.' See <i>post</i>, iii. 180.</p>

<p>[1390] See <i>ante</i>, p. 460.</p>

<p>[1391] He did not hold with Steele, who in <i>The Spectator</i>, No. 153,
writes:—'It was prettily said, "He that would be long an old man must
begin early to be one."' Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 275) says that 'saying
of the old philosopher, that he who wants least is most like the gods
who want nothing, was a favourite sentence with Dr. Johnson, who
required less attendance, sick or well, than ever I saw any human
creature.'</p>

<p>[1392] Dr. Butter, of Derby, is mentioned <i>post</i>, iii. 163, and under
May 8, 1781.</p>

<p>[1393] Andrew Stuart's <i>Letters to Lord Mansfield</i> (<i>ante</i>, ii. 229).</p>

<p>[1394] Johnson was thinking of Charles's meeting with the King of
Poland. 'Charles XII. était en grosses bottes, ayant pour cravate un
taffetas noir qui lui serrait le cou; son habit était, comme Ã
l'ordinaire, d'un gros drap bleu, avec des boutons de cuivre doré.'
Voltaire's <i>Works</i>, ed. 1819, xx. 123.</p>

</body>
</html>
