<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
	<head>
		<title/>
		<meta content="BBEdit 14.0" name="generator"/>
	</head>
	<body>
		<h2>FOOTNOTES:</h2>
		<p>[1] <i>Post</i>, iv. 172.</p>
		<p>[2] <i>Post</i>, iii. 312.</p>
		<p>[3] <i>Post</i>, i. 324.</p>
		<p>[4] <i>History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire</i>, ed. 1807, vol. i. p. xi.</p>
		<p>[5] <i>Post</i>, iii. 230.</p>
		<p>[6] <i>Post</i>, i. 7.</p>
		<p>[7] <i>Post</i>, ii. 212.</p>
		<p>[8] <i>Post</i>, i. 7.</p>
		<p>[9] <i>Post</i>, iv. 444.</p>
		<p>[10] <i>Post</i>, ii. 100.</p>
		<p>[11] <i>Post</i>, iv. 429; v. 17.</p>
		<p>[12] <i>Post</i>, v. 117.</p>
		<p>[13] <i>Post</i>, i. 472, n. 4; iv. 260, n. 2; v. 405, n. 1, 454, n. 2; vi. i-xxxvii.</p>
		<p>[14] <i>Post</i>, i. 60, n. 7.</p>
		<p>[15] <i>Post</i>, ii. 476.</p>
		<p>[16] <i>Post</i>, vi. xxxiv.</p>
		<p>[17] <i>Post</i>, iii. 462.</p>
		<p>[18] <i>Post</i>, vi. xxii.</p>
		<p>[19] <i>Post</i>, iv. 8, n. 3.</p>
		<p>[20] <i>Post</i>, i. 489, 518.</p>
		<p>[21] <i>Post</i>, iv. 223, n. 3.</p>
		<p>[22] <i>Post</i>, i. 39, n. 1.</p>
		<p>[23] <i>Post</i>, iii. 340, n. 2.</p>
		<p>[24] <i>Post</i>, i. 103, n. 3.</p>
		<p>[25] <i>Post</i>, i. 501.</p>
		<p>[26] <i>Post</i>, iii. 443.</p>
		<p>[27] <i>Post</i>, iii. 314.</p>
		<p>[28] <i>Post</i>, iii. 449.</p>
		<p>[29] <i>Post</i>, iii. 478.</p>
		<p>[30] <i>Post</i>, iii. 459.</p>
		<p>[31] <i>Post</i>, i. 189. n. 2.</p>
		<p>[32] i. 296, n. 3.</p>
		<p>[33] <i>Post</i>, vi. 289.</p>
		<p>[34] <i>Post</i>, ii. 350.</p>
		<p>[35] <i>Post</i>, iii. 137, n. 1; 389.</p>
		<p>[36] <i>Post</i>, i. 14</p>
		<p>[37] <i>Post</i>, i. 7⁠–⁠8</p>
		<p>[38] <i>Post</i>, i. 14⁠–⁠15.</p>
		<p>[39] <i>Post</i>, iv. 31, n. 3</p>
		<p>[40] ii. 173⁠–⁠4.</p>
		<p>[41] vol. ii. p. 47.</p>
		<p>[42] Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, ed. 1825, vol. v. p. 152.</p>
		<p>[43] Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, ed. 1825, vol. v. p. 152.</p>
		<p>[44] See <i>Post</i>, ii. 35, 424⁠–⁠6, 441.</p>
		<p>[45] See <i>Post</i>, iv. 422.</p>
		<p>[46] <i>Correspondence of Edmund Burke</i>, ii. 425.</p>
		<p>[47] To this interesting and accurate publication I am indebted for many valuable notes.</p>
		<p>[48] <i>Post</i>, iii. 51, n. 3.</p>
		<p>[49] Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, ed. 1825, vol. iv. p. 446.</p>
		<p>[50] <i>Post</i>, i. 331, <i>n</i>. 7.</p>
		<p>[51] Johnson said of him:⁠—‘Sir Joshua Reynolds is the same all the year round;’ <i>post</i>, March 28, 1776. Boswell elsewhere describes him as ‘he who used to be looked upon as perhaps the most happy man in the world.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 344.</p>
		<p>[52] ‘O noctes coenaeque Deum!’ ‘O joyous nights! delicious feasts! At which the gods might be my guests. <i>Francis</i>. Horace, <i>Sat</i>, ii. 6. 65.</p>
		<p>[53] Six years before this Dedication Sir Joshua had conferred on him another favour. ‘I have a proposal to make to you,’ Boswell had written to him, ‘I am for certain to be called to the English bar next February. Will you now do my picture? and the price shall be paid out of the first fees which I receive as a barrister in Westminster Hall. Or if that fund should fail, it shall be paid at any rate five years hence by myself or my representatives.’ Boswell told him at the same time that the debts which he had contracted in his father’s lifetime would not be cleared off for some years. The letter was endorsed by Sir Joshua:⁠—‘I agree to the above conditions;’ and the portrait was painted. Taylor’s <i>Reynolds</i>, ii. 477.</p>
		<p>[54] See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 24, 1773.</p>
		<p>[55] ‘I surely have the art of writing agreeably. The Lord Chancellor [Thurlow] told me he had read every word of my <i>Hebridian Journal</i>;’ he could not help it; adding, ‘could you give a rule how to write a book that a man <i>must</i> read? I believe Longinus could not.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 322.</p>
		<p>[56] Boswell perhaps quotes from memory the following passage in Goldsmith’s <i>Life of Nash</i>:⁠—‘The doctor was one day conversing with Locke and two or three more of his learned and intimate companions, with that freedom, gaiety, and cheerfulness, which is ever the result of innocence. In the midst of their mirth and laughter, the doctor, looking from the window, saw Nash’s chariot stop at the door. “Boys, boys,” cried the philosopher, “let us now be wise, for here is a fool coming.” ’ Cunningham’s Goldsmith’s <i>Works</i>, iv. 96. Dr. Warton in his criticism on Pope’s line</p>
		<p id="id02550" style="margin-left: 0%; margin-right: 0%">‘Unthought of frailties cheat us in the wise,’</p>
		<p>(<i>Moral Essays</i>, i. 69) says:⁠—‘For who could imagine that Dr. Clarke valued himself for his agility, and frequently amused himself in a private room of his house in leaping over the tables and chairs.’ Warton’s <i>Essay on Pope</i>, ii. 125. ‘It is a good remark of Montaigne’s,’ wrote Goldsmith, ‘that the wisest men often have friends with whom they do not care how much they play the fool.’ Forster’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 166. Mr. Seward says in his <i>Anecdotes</i>, ii. 320, that ‘in the opinion of Dr. Johnson’ Dr. Clarke was the most complete literary character that England ever produced.’ For Dr. Clarke’s sermons see <i>post</i>, April 7, 1778.</p>
		<p>[57] See <i>post</i>, Oct. 16, 1769, note.</p>
		<p>[58] How much delighted would Boswell have been, had he been shewn the following passage, recorded by Miss Burney, in an account she gives of a conversation with the Queen:⁠—</p>
		<p>THE QUEEN:⁠—‘Miss Burney, have you heard that Boswell is going to publish a life of your friend Dr. Johnson?’ ‘No, ma’am!’ ‘I tell you as I heard, I don’t know for the truth of it, and I can’t tell what he will do. He is so extraordinary a man that perhaps he will devise something extraordinary.’ <i>Mme. D’Artlay’s Diary</i>, ii. 400. ‘Dr. Johnson’s history,’ wrote Horace Walpole, on June 20, 1785, ‘though he is going to have as many lives as a cat, might be reduced to four lines; but I shall wait to extract the quintessence till Sir John Hawkins, Madame Piozzi, and Mr. Boswell have produced their quartos.’ Horace Walpole’s <i>Letters</i>, viii. 557.</p>
		<p>[59] The delay was in part due to Boswell’s dissipation and place-hunting, as is shewn by the following passages in his <i>Letters</i> to Temple:⁠—‘Feb. 24, 1788, I have been wretchedly dissipated, so that I have not written a line for a fortnight.’ p. 266. ‘Nov. 28, 1789, Malone’s hospitality, and my other invitations, and particularly my attendance at Lord Lonsdale’s, have lost us many evenings.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 311. ‘June 21, 1790, How unfortunate to be obliged to interrupt my work! Never was a poor ambitious projector more mortified. I am suffering without any prospect of reward, and only from my own folly.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 326.</p>
		<p>[60] ‘You cannot imagine what labour, what perplexity, what vexation I have endured in arranging a prodigious multiplicity of materials, in supplying omissions, in searching for papers, buried in different masses, and all this besides the exertion of composing and polishing; many a time have I thought of giving it up.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 311.</p>
		<p>[61] Boswell writing to Temple in 1775, says:⁠—‘I try to keep a journal, and shall shew you that I have done tolerably; but it is hardly credible what ground I go over, and what a variety of men and manners I contemplate in a day; and all the time I myself am <i>pars magna</i>, for my exuberant spirits will not let me listen enough.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 188. Mr. Barclay said that ‘he had seen Boswell lay down his knife and fork, and take out his tablets, in order to register a good anecdote.’ Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, p. 837. The account given by Paoli to Miss Burney, shows that very early in life Boswell took out his tablets:⁠—‘He came to my country, and he fetched me some letter of recommending him; but I was of the belief he might be an impostor, and I supposed in my minde he was an espy; for I look away from him, and in a moment I look to him again, and I behold his tablets. Oh! he was to the work of writing down all I say. Indeed I was angry. But soon I discover he was no impostor and no espy; and I only find I was myself the monster he had come to discern. Oh! he is a very good man; I love him indeed; so cheerful, so gay, so pleasant! but at the first, oh! I was indeed angry.’ <i>Mme. D’Arblay’s Diary</i>, ii. 155. Boswell not only recorded the conversations, he often stimulated them. On one occasion ‘he assumed,’ he said, ‘an air of ignorance to incite Dr. Johnson to talk, for which it was often necessary to employ some address.’ See <i>post</i>, April 12, 1776. ‘Tom Tyers,’ said Johnson, ‘described me the best. He once said to me, “Sir, you are like a ghost: you never speak till you are spoken to.” ’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 20, 1773. Boswell writing of this Tour said:⁠—‘I also may be allowed to claim some merit in leading the conversation; I do not mean leading, as in an orchestra, by playing the first fiddle; but leading as one does in examining a witness⁠—starting topics, and making him pursue them.’ <i>Ib</i>. Sept. 28. One day he recorded:⁠—‘I did not exert myself to get Dr. Johnson to talk, that I might not have the labour of writing down his conversation.’ <i>Ib</i>. Sept. 7. His industry grew much less towards the close of Johnson’s life. Under May 8, 1781, he records:⁠—‘Of his conversation on that and other occasions during this period, I neglected to keep any regular record.’ On May 15, 1783:⁠—‘I have no minute of any interview with Johnson [from May 1] till May 15. ‘May 15, 1784:⁠—‘Of these days and others on which I saw him I have no memorials.’</p>
		<p>[62] It is an interesting question how far Boswell derived his love of truth from himself, and how far from Johnson’s training. He was one of Johnson’s <i>school</i>. He himself quotes Reynolds’s observation, ‘that all who were of his <i>school</i> are distinguished for a love of truth and accuracy, which they would not have possessed in the same degree if they had not been acquainted with Johnson’ (<i>post</i>, under March 30, 1778). Writing to Temple in 1789, he said:⁠—‘Johnson taught me to cross-question in common life.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 280. His quotations, nevertheless, are not unfrequently inaccurate. Yet to him might fairly be applied the words that Gibbon used of Tillemont:⁠—‘His inimitable accuracy almost assumes the character of genius.’ Gibbon’s <i>Misc. Words</i>, i. 213.</p>
		<p>[63] ‘The revision of my <i>Life of Johnson</i>, by so acute and knowing a critic as Mr. Malone, is of most essential consequence, especially as he is <i>Johnsonianissimum</i>.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 310. A few weeks earlier he had written:⁠—‘Yesterday afternoon Malone and I made ready for the press thirty pages of Johnson’s <i>Life</i>; he is much pleased with it; but I feel a sad indifference [he had lately lost his wife], and he says, “I have not the use of my faculties.” ’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 308.</p>
		<p>[64] Horace, <i>Odes</i>, i. 3. 1.</p>
		<p>[65] He had published an answer to Hume’s <i>Essay on Miracles</i>. See <i>post</i>, March 20, 1776.</p>
		<p>[66] Macleod asked if it was not wrong in Orrery to expose the defects of a man [Swift] with whom he lived in intimacy, Johnson, ‘Why no, Sir, after the man is dead; for then it is done historically.’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 22, 1773. See also <i>post</i>, Sept 17, 1777.</p>
		<p>[67] See Mr. Malone’s Preface to his edition of Shakspeare. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[68] ‘April 6, 1791.</p>
		<p>‘My <i>Life of Johnson</i> is at last drawing to a close.⁠ ⁠… I really hope to publish it on the 25th current.⁠ ⁠… I am at present in such bad spirits that I have every fear concerning it⁠—that I may get no profit, nay, may lose⁠—that the Public may be disappointed, and think that I have done it poorly⁠—that I may make many enemies, and even have quarrels. Yet perhaps the very reverse of all this may happen.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 335.</p>
		<p>‘August 22, 1791.</p>
		<p>‘My <i>magnum opus</i> sells wonderfully; twelve hundred are now gone, and we hope the whole seventeen hundred may be gone before Christmas.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 342.</p>
		<p>Malone in his Preface to the fourth edition, dated June 20, 1804, says that ‘near four thousand copies have been dispersed.’ The first edition was in 2 vols., quarto; the second (1793) in 3 vols., octavo; the third (1799), the fourth (1804), the fifth (1807), and the sixth (1811), were each in 4 vols., octavo. The last four were edited by Malone, Boswell having died while he was preparing notes for the third edition.</p>
		<p>[69] ‘Burke affirmed that Boswell’s <i>Life</i> was a greater monument to Johnson’s fame than all his writings put together.’ <i>Life of Mackintosh</i>, i. 92.</p>
		<p>[70] It is a pamphlet of forty-two pages, under the title of <i>The Principal Corrections and Additions to the First Edition of Mr. Boswell’s Life Of Johnson</i>. Price two shillings and sixpence.</p>
		<p>[71] Reynolds died on Feb. 23, 1792.</p>
		<p>[72] Sir Joshua in his will left £200 to Mr. Boswell ‘to be expended, if he thought proper, in the purchase of a picture at the sale of his paintings, to be kept for his sake.’ Taylor’s <i>Reynolds</i>, ii. 636.</p>
		<p>[73] Of the seventy-five years that Johnson lived, he and Boswell did not spend two years and two months in the same neighbourhood. Excluding the time they were together on their tour to the Hebrides, they were dwelling within reach of each other a few weeks less than two years. Moreover, when they were apart, there were great gaps in their correspondence. Between Dec. 8, 1763, and Jan. 14, 1766, and again between Nov. 10, 1769 and June 20, 1771, during which periods they did not meet, Boswell did not receive a single letter from Johnson. The following table shows the times they were in the same neighbourhood.</p>
		<p>1763, May 16 to Aug. 6, London. 1766, a few days in February ” 1768, ” ” March, Oxford. 1768, a few days in May, London. 1769, end of Sept. to Nov. 10, ” 1772, March 21 to about May 10, ” 1773, April 3 to May 10, ” ” Aug. 14 to Nov. 22, Scotland. 1775, March 21 to April 18, London. May 2 to May 23, ” 1776, March 15 to May 16, London, Oxford, Birmingham, with an interval of Lichfield, about a fortnight, Ashbourne, when Johnson was at and Bath and Boswell at Bath. London, 1777, Sept. 14 to Sept. 24, Ashbourne. 1778, March 18 to May 19, London. 1779, March 15 to May 3, ” ” Oct. 4 to Oct. 18, ” 1781, March 19 to June 5, London and Southill. 1783, March 21 to May 30, London. 1784, May 5 to June 30, London and Oxford.</p>
		<p>[74]</p>
		<p>‘To shew what wisdom and what sense can do,<br/>
		The poet sets Ulysses in our view.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>Francis</i>. Horace, <i>Ep</i>. i. 2. 17.</p>
		<p>[75] In his _Letter to the People of Scotland, p. 92, he wrote:⁠—‘Allow me, my friends and countrymen, while I with honest zeal maintain <i>your</i> cause⁠—allow me to indulge a little more my <i>own egotism</i> and <i>vanity</i>. They are the indigenous plants of my mind; they distinguish it. I may prune their luxuriancy; but I must not entirely clear it of them; for then I should be no longer “as I am;” and perhaps there might be something not so good.’</p>
		<p>[76] See <i>post</i>, April 17, 1778, note.</p>
		<p>[77] Lord Macartney was the first English ambassador to the Court of Pekin. He left England in 1792 and returned in 1794.</p>
		<p>[78] Boswell writing to Temple ten days earlier had said:⁠—‘Behold my <i>hand</i>! the robbery is only of a few shillings; but the cut on my head and bruises on my arms were sad things, and confined me to bed, in pain, and fever, and helplessness, as a child, many days.⁠ ⁠… This shall be a crisis in my life: I trust I shall henceforth be a sober regular man. Indeed, my indulgence in wine has, of late years especially, been excessive.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 346.</p>
		<p>[79] On this day his brother wrote to Mr. Temple: ‘I have now the painful task of informing you that my dear brother expired this morning at two o’clock; we have both lost a kind, affectionate friend, and I shall never have such another.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 357. What was probably Boswell’s last letter is as follows:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘My Dear Temple,</p>
		<p>‘I would fain write to you in my own hand, but really cannot. [These words, which are hardly legible, and probably the last poor Boswell ever wrote, afford the clearest evidence of his utter physical prostration.] Alas, my friend, what a state is this! My son James is to write for me what remains of this letter, and I am to dictate. The pain which continued for so many weeks was very severe indeed, and when it went off I thought myself quite well; but I soon felt a conviction that I was by no means as I should be⁠—so exceedingly weak, as my miserable attempt to write to you afforded a full proof. All then that can be said is, that I must wait with patience. But, O my friend! how strange is it that, at this very time of my illness, you and Miss Temple should have been in such a dangerous state. Much occasion for thankfulness is there that it has not been worse with you. Pray write, or make somebody write frequently. I feel myself a good deal stronger to-day, not withstanding the scrawl. God bless you, my dear Temple! I ever am your old and affectionate friend, here and I trust hereafter,</p>
		<p>‘JAMES BOSWELL.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 353.</p>
		<p>[80] Malone died on May 25, 1812.</p>
		<p>[81] I do not here include his Poetical Works; for, excepting his Latin Translation of Pope’s <i>Messiah</i>, his <i>London</i>, and his <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i> imitated from <i>Juvenal</i>; his Prologue on the opening of Drury-Lane Theatre by Mr. Garrick, and his <i>Irene</i>, a Tragedy, they are very numerous, and in general short; and I have promised a complete edition of them, in which I shall with the utmost care ascertain their authenticity, and illustrate them with notes and various readings. BOSWELL. Boswell’s meaning, though not well expressed, is clear enough. Mr. Croker needlessly suggests that he wrote ‘they are <i>not</i> very numerous.’ Boswell a second time (<i>post</i>, under Aug. 12, 1784, note) mentions his intention to edit Johnson’s poems. He died without doing it. See also <i>post</i>, 1750, Boswell’s note on Addison’s style.</p>
		<p>[82] The <i>Female Quixote</i> was published in 1752. See <i>post</i>, 1762, note.</p>
		<p>[83] The first four volumes of the <i>Lives</i> were published in 1779, the last six in 1781.</p>
		<p>[84] See Dr. Johnson’s letter to Mrs. Thrale, dated Ostick in Skie, September 30, 1773:⁠—‘Boswell writes a regular Journal of our travels, which I think contains as much of what I say and do, as of all other occurrences together; “<i>for such a faithful chronicler</i> is <i>Griffith</i>.” ’ BOSWELL. See <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 159, where however we read ‘<i>as</i> Griffith.’</p>
		<p>[85] <i>Idler</i>, No. 84. BOSWELL.⁠—In this paper he says: ‘Those relations are commonly of most value in which the writer tells his own story. He that recounts the life of another⁠ ⁠… lessens the familiarity of his tale to increase its dignity⁠ ⁠… and endeavours to hide the man that he may produce a hero.’</p>
		<p>[86] ‘It very seldom happens to man that his business is his pleasure. What is done from necessity is so often to be done when against the present inclination, and so often fills the mind with anxiety, that an habitual dislike steals upon us, and we shrink involuntarily from the remembrance of our task.⁠ ⁠… From this unwillingness to perform more than is required of that which is commonly performed with reluctance it proceeds that few authors write their own lives.’ <i>Idler</i>, No. 102. See also <i>post</i>, May 1, 1783.</p>
		<p>[87] Mrs. Piozzi records the following conversation with Johnson, which, she says, took place on July 18, 1773. ‘And who will be my biographer,’ said he, ‘do you think?’ ‘Goldsmith, no doubt,’ replied I; ‘and he will do it the best among us.’ ‘The dog would write it best to be sure,’ replied he; ‘but his particular malice towards me, and general disregard for truth, would make the book useless to all, and injurious to my character.’ ‘Oh! as to that,’ said I, ‘we should all fasten upon him, and force him to do you justice; but the worst is, the Doctor does not <i>know</i> your life; nor can I tell indeed who does, except Dr. Taylor of Ashbourne.’ ‘Why Taylor,’ said he, ‘is better acquainted with my <i>heart</i> than any man or woman now alive; and the history of my Oxford exploits lies all between him and Adams; but Dr. James knows my very early days better than he. After my coming to London to drive the world about a little, you must all go to Jack Hawkesworth for anecdotes: I lived in great familiarity with him (though I think there was not much affection) from the year 1753 till the time Mr. Thrale and you took me up. I intend, however, to disappoint the rogues, and either make you write the life, with Taylor’s intelligence; or, which is better, do it myself after outliving you all. I am now,’ added he, ‘keeping a diary, in hopes of using it for that purpose sometime.’ Piozzi’s <i>Anec</i>. p. 31. How much of this is true cannot be known. Boswell some time before this conversation had told Johnson that he intended to write his Life, and Johnson had given him many particulars (see <i>post</i>, March 31, 1772, and April 11, 1773). He read moreover in manuscript most of Boswell’s <i>Tour to the Hebrides</i>, and from it learnt of his intention. ‘It is no small satisfaction to me to reflect,’ Boswell wrote, ‘that Dr. Johnson, after being apprised of my intentions, communicated to me, at subsequent periods, many particulars of his life.’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 14, 1773.</p>
		<p>[88] ‘It may be said the death of Dr. Johnson kept the public mind in agitation beyond all former example. No literary character ever excited so much attention.’ Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 3.</p>
		<p>[89] The greatest part of this book was written while Sir John Hawkins was alive; and I avow, that one object of my strictures was to make him feel some compunction for his illiberal treatment of Dr. Johnson. Since his decease, I have suppressed several of my remarks upon his work. But though I would not ‘war with the dead’ <i>offensively</i>, I think it necessary to be strenuous in <i>defence</i> of my illustrious friend, which I cannot be without strong animadversions upon a writer who has greatly injured him. Let me add, that though I doubt I should not have been very prompt to gratify Sir John Hawkins with any compliment in his life-time, I do now frankly acknowledge, that, in my opinion, his volume, however inadequate and improper as a life of Dr. Johnson, and however discredited by unpardonable inaccuracies in other respects, contains a collection of curious anecdotes and observations, which few men but its author could have brought together. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[90] ‘The next name that was started was that of Sir John Hawkins; and Mrs. Thrale said, “Why now, Dr. Johnson, he is another of those whom you suffer nobody to abuse but yourself: Garrick is one too; for, if any other person speaks against him, you brow-beat him in a minute.” “Why madam,” answered he, “they don’t know when to abuse him, and when to praise him; I will allow no man to speak ill of David that he does not deserve; and as to Sir John, why really I believe him to be an honest man at the bottom; but to be sure he is penurious, and he is mean, and it must be owned he has a degree of brutality, and a tendency to savageness, that cannot easily be defended.⁠ ⁠… He said that Sir John and he once belonged to the same club, but that as he eat no supper, after, the first night of his admission he desired to be excused paying his share.” “And was he excused?” “O yes; for no man is angry at another for being inferior to himself. We all scorned him, and admitted his plea. For my part, I was such a fool as to pay my share for wine, though I never tasted any. But Sir John was a most <i>unclubable man</i>.” ’ Madame D’Arblay’s <i>Diary</i>, i. 65.</p>
		<p>[91] ‘In censuring Mr. [<i>sic</i>] J. Hawkins’s book I say: “There is throughout the whole of it a dark, uncharitable cast, which puts the most unfavourable construction on my illustrious friend’s conduct.” Malone maintains <i>cast</i> will not do; he will have “malignancy.” Is that not too strong? How would “disposition” do?⁠ ⁠… Hawkins is no doubt very malevolent. <i>Observe how he talks of me as quite unknown.’ Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 281. Malone wrote of Hawkins as follows: ‘The bishop [Bishop Percy of Dromore] concurred with every other person I have heard speak of Hawkins, in saying that he was a most detestable fellow. He was the son of a carpenter, and set out in life in the very lowest line of the law. Dyer knew him well at one time, and the Bishop heard him give a character of Hawkins once that painted him in the blackest colours; though Dyer was by no means apt to deal in such portraits. Dyer said he was a man of the most mischievous, uncharitable, and malignant disposition. Sir Joshua Reynolds observed to me that Hawkins, though he assumed great outward sanctity, was not only mean and grovelling in dispostion, but absolutely dishonest. He never lived in any real intimacy with Dr. Johnson, who never opened his heart to him, or had in fact any accurate knowledge of his character.’ Prior’s <i>Malone</i>, pp. 425⁠–⁠7. See <i>post</i>, Feb. 1764, note.</p>
		<p>[92] Mrs. Piozzi. See <i>post</i>, under June 30, 1784.</p>
		<p>[93] Voltaire in his account of Bayle says: ‘Des Maizeaux a écrit sa vie en un gros volume; elle ne devait pas contenir six pages.’ Voltaire’s <i>Works</i>, edition of 1819, xvii. 47.</p>
		<p>[94] Brit. Mus. 4320, Ayscough’s Catal., Sloane MSS. BOSWELL.⁠—Horace Walpole describes Birch as ‘a worthy, good-natured soul, full of industry and activity, and running about like a young setting-dog in quest of anything, new or old, and with no parts, taste, or judgment.’ Walpole’s <i>Letters</i>, vii. 326. See <i>post</i>, Sept. 1743.</p>
		<p>[95] ‘You have fixed the method of biography, and whoever will write a life well must imitate you.’ Horace Walpole to Mason; Walpole’s <i>Letters</i>, vi. 211.</p>
		<p>[96] ‘I am absolutely certain that my mode of biography, which gives not only a <i>History</i> of Johnson’s <i>visible</i> progress through the world, and of his publications, but a <i>view</i> of his mind in his letters and conversations, is the most perfect that can be conceived, and will be more of a Life than any work that has ever yet appeared.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 265.</p>
		<p>[97] Pope’s Prologue to Addison’s <i>Cato</i>, 1. 4.</p>
		<p>[98] ‘Boswell is the first of biographers. He has distanced all his competitors so decidedly that it is not worth while to place them. Eclipse is first, and the rest nowhere.’ Macaulay’s <i>Essays</i>, i. 374.</p>
		<p>[99] See <i>post</i>, Sept. 17, 1777, and Malone’s note of March 15, 1781, and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 22, 1773. Hannah More met Boswell when he was carrying through the press his <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>. ‘Boswell tells me,’ she writes, ‘he is printing anecdotes of Johnson, not his <i>Life</i>, but, as he has the vanity to call it, his <i>pyramid</i>. I besought his tenderness for our virtuous and most revered departed friend, and begged he would mitigate some of his asperities. He said roughly: “He would not cut off his claws, nor make a tiger a cat, to please anybody.” It will, I doubt not, be a very amusing book, but, I hope, not an indiscreet one; he has great enthusiasm and some fire.’ H. More’s <i>Memoirs</i>, i. 403.</p>
		<p>[100] Rambler, No. 60. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[101] In the <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>.</p>
		<p>[102] ‘Mason’s <i>Life of Gray</i> is excellent, because it is interspersed with letters which show us the <i>man</i>. His <i>Life of Whitehead</i> is not a life at all, for there is neither a letter nor a saying from first to last.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 265.</p>
		<p>[103] The Earl and Countess of Jersey, WRIGHT.</p>
		<p>[104] Plutarch’s <i>Life of Alexander</i>, Langhorne’s Translation. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[105] In the original, <i>revolving something</i>.</p>
		<p>[106] In the original, <i>and so little regard the manners</i>.</p>
		<p>[107] In the original, <i>and are rarely transmitted</i>.</p>
		<p>[108] <i>Rambler</i>, No. 60. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[109] Bacon’s <i>Advancement of Learning</i>, Book I. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[110] Johnson’s godfather, Dr. Samuel Swinfen, according to the author of <i>Memoirs of the Life and Writings of Dr. Johnson</i>, 1785, p. 10, was at the time of his birth lodging with Michael Johnson. Johnson had uncles on the mother’s side, named Samuel and Nathanael (see <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 5th S. v. 13), after whom he and his brother may have been named. It seems more likely that it was his godfather who gave him his name.</p>
		<p>[111] So early as 1709 <i>The Tatler</i> complains of this ‘indiscriminate assumption.’ ‘I’ll undertake that if you read the superscriptions to all the offices in the kingdom, you will not find three letters directed to any but Esquires.⁠ ⁠… In a word it is now <i>Populus Armigerorum</i>, a people of Esquires, And I don’t know but by the late act of naturalisation, foreigners will assume that title as part of the immunity of being Englishmen.’ <i>The Tatler</i>, No. 19.</p>
		<p>[112] ‘I can hardly tell who was my grandfather,’ said Johnson. See <i>post</i>, May 9, 1773.</p>
		<p>[113] Michael Johnson was born in 1656. He must have been engaged in the book-trade as early as 1681; for in the <i>Life of Dryden</i> his son says, ‘The sale of Absalom and Achitophel was so large, that my father, an old bookseller, told me, he had not known it equalled but by Sacheverell’s Trial.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 276. In the <i>Life of Sprat</i> he is described by his son as ‘an old man who had been no careless observer of the passages of those times.’ Ib. 392.</p>
		<p>[114] Her epitaph says that she was born at Kingsnorton. Kingsnorton is in Worcestershire, and not, as the epitaph says, ‘in agro Varvicensi.’ When Johnson a few days before his death burnt his papers, some fragments of his <i>Annals</i> escaped the flames. One of these was never seen by Boswell; it was published in 1805 under the title of <i>An Account of the Life of Dr. Samuel Johnson, from his Birth to his Eleventh Year, written by himself</i>. In this he says (p. 14), ‘My mother had no value for my father’s relations; those indeed whom we knew of were much lower than hers.’ Writing to Mrs. Thrale on his way to Scotland he said: ‘We changed our horses at Darlington, where Mr. Cornelius Harrison, a cousin-german of mine, was perpetual curate. He was the only one of my relations who ever rose in fortune above penury, or in character above neglect.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 105. His uncle Harrison he described as ‘a very mean and vulgar man, drunk every night, but drunk with little drink, very peevish, very proud, very ostentatious, but luckily not rich.’ <i>Annals</i>, p. 28. In <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S. x. 465, is given the following extract of the marriage of Johnson’s parents from the Register of Packwood in Warwickshire:⁠—</p>
		<p>’1706. Mickell Johnsones of lichfield and Sara ford maried June the 9th.’</p>
		<p>[115] Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 3) records that Johnson told her that ‘his father was wrong-headed, positive, and afflicted with melancholy.’</p>
		<p>[116] <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>, 3rd edit. p. 213 [Sept. 16]. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[117] Stockdale in his <i>Memoirs</i>, ii. 102, records an anecdote told him by Johnson of ‘the generosity of one of the customers of his father. “This man was purchasing a book, and pressed my father to let him have it at a far less price than it was worth. When his other topics of persuasion failed, he had recourse to one argument which, he thought, would infallibly prevail:⁠—You know, Mr. Johnson, that I buy an almanac of you every year.” ’</p>
		<p>[118] Extract of a letter, dated ‘Trentham, St. Peter’s day, 1716,’ written by the Rev. George Plaxton, Chaplain at that time to Lord Gower, which may serve to show the high estimation in which the Father of our great Moralist was held: ‘Johnson, the Litchfield Librarian, is now here; he propagates learning all over this diocese, and advanceth knowledge to its just height; all the Clergy here are his Pupils, and suck all they have from him; Allen cannot make a warrant without his precedent, nor our quondam John Evans draw a recognizance <i>sine directione Michaelis</i>.’ <i>Gentleman’s Magazine</i>, October, 1791. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[119] In <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 3rd S. v. 33, is given the following title-page of one of his books: ‘[Greek: Pharmako-Basauos]: <i>or the Touchstone of Medicines, etc</i>. By Sir John Floyer of the City of Litchfield, Kt., M.D., of Queen’s College, Oxford. London: Printed for Michael Johnson, Bookseller, and are to be sold at his shops at Litchfield and Uttoxiter, in Staffordshire; and Ashby-de-la-Zouch, in Leicestershire, 1687.’</p>
		<p>[120] Johnson writing of his birth says: ‘My father being that year sheriff of Lichfield, and to ride the circuit of the county [Mr. Croker suggests city, not being aware that ‘the City of Lichfield was a county in itself.’ See Harwood’s <i>Lichfield</i>, p. 1. In like manner, in the Militia Bill of 1756 (<i>post</i> 1756) we find entered, ‘Devonshire with Exeter City and County,’ ‘Lincolnshire with Lincoln City and County’] next day, which was a ceremony then performed with great pomp, he was asked by my mother whom he would invite to the Riding; and answered, “all the town now.” He feasted the citizens with uncommon magnificence, and was the last but one that maintained the splendour of the Riding.’ <i>Annals</i>, p. 10. He served the office of churchwarden in 1688; of sheriff in 1709; of junior bailiff in 1718; and senior bailiff in 1725.’ Harwood’s <i>Lichfield</i>, p. 449.</p>
		<p>[121] ‘My father and mother had not much happiness from each other. They seldom conversed; for my father could not bear to talk of his affairs, and my mother being unacquainted with books cared not to talk of anything else. Had my mother been more literate, they had been better companions. She might have sometimes introduced her unwelcome topic with more success, if she could have diversified her conversation. Of business she had no distinct conception; and therefore her discourse was composed only of complaint, fear, and suspicion. Neither of them ever tried to calculate the profits of trade, or the expenses of living. My mother concluded that we were poor, because we lost by some of our trades; but the truth was, that my father, having in the early part of his life contracted debts, never had trade sufficient to enable him to pay them and maintain his family; he got something, but not enough.’ <i>Annals</i>, p. 14. Mr. Croker noticing the violence of Johnson’s language against the Excise, with great acuteness suspected ‘some cause of <i>personal animosity</i>;’ this mention of the trade in parchment (an <i>exciseable</i> article) afforded a clue, which has led to the confirmation of that suspicion. In the records of the Excise Board is to be found the following letter, addressed to the supervisor of excise at Lichfield: ‘July 27, 1725. The Commissioners received yours of the 22nd instant, and since the justices would not give judgment against Mr. Michael Johnson, <i>the tanner</i>, notwithstanding the facts were fairly against him, the Board direct that the next time he offends, you do not lay an information against him, but send an affidavit of the fact, that he may be prosecuted in the Exchequer.’</p>
		<p>[122] See <i>post</i>, March 27, 1775.</p>
		<p>[123] ‘I remember, that being in bed with my mother one morning, I was told by her of the two places to which the inhabitants of this world were received after death: one a fine place filled with happiness, called Heaven; the other, a sad place, called Hell. That this account much affected my imagination I do not remember.’ <i>Annals</i>, p. 19.</p>
		<p>[124] Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 406.</p>
		<p>[125] Mr. Croker disbelieves the story altogether. ‘Sacheverel,’ he says, ‘by his sentence pronounced in Feb. 1710, was interdicted for three years from preaching; so that he could not have preached at Lichfield while Johnson was under three years of age. Sacheverel, indeed, made a triumphal progress through the midland counties in 1710; and it appears by the books of the corporation of Lichfield that he was received in that town, and complimented by the attendance of the corporation, “and a present of three dozen of wine,” on June 16, 1710; but then “the <i>infant Hercules of Toryism</i>” was just <i>nine months</i> old.’ It is quite possible that the story is in the main correct. Sacheverel was received in Lichfield in 1710 on his way down to Shropshire to take possession of a living. At the end of the suspension in March 1713 he preached a sermon in London, for which, as he told Swift, ‘a book-seller gave him £100, intending to print 30,000’ (Swift’s <i>Journal to Stella</i>, April 2, 1713). It is likely enough that either on his way up to town or on his return journey he preached at Lichfield. In the spring of 1713 Johnson was three years old.</p>
		<p>[126] See <i>post</i>, p. 48, and April 25,1778 note; and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 28, 1773.</p>
		<p>[127] <i>Anecdotes of Dr. Johnson</i>, by Hester Lynch Piozzi, p. 11. Life of Dr. Johnson_, by Sir John Hawkins, p. 6. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[128] ‘My father had much vanity which his adversity hindered from being fully exerted.’ <i>Annals</i>, p. 14.</p>
		<p>[129] This anecdote of the duck, though disproved by internal and external evidence, has nevertheless, upon supposition of its truth, been made the foundation of the following ingenious and fanciful reflections of Miss Seward, amongst the communications concerning Dr. Johnson with which she has been pleased to favour me: ‘These infant numbers contain the seeds of those propensities which through his life so strongly marked his character, of that poetick talent which afterwards bore such rich and plentiful fruits; for, excepting his orthographick works, every thing which Dr. Johnson wrote was Poetry, whose essence consists not in numbers, or in jingle, but in the strength and glow of a fancy, to which all the stores of nature and of art stand in prompt administration; and in an eloquence which conveys their blended illustrations in a language “more tuneable than needs or rhyme or verse to add more harmony.”</p>
		<p>‘The above little verses also shew that superstitious bias which “grew with his growth, and strengthened with his strength,” and, of late years particularly, injured his happiness, by presenting to him the gloomy side of religion, rather than that bright and cheering one which gilds the period of closing life with the light of pious hope.’</p>
		<p>This is so beautifully imagined, that I would not suppress it. But like many other theories, it is deduced from a supposed fact, which is, indeed, a fiction. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[130] <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, p. 27. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[131] Speaking himself of the imperfection of one of his eyes, he said to Dr. Burney, ‘the dog was never good for much.’ MALONE.</p>
		<p>[132] Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 1, 1773.</p>
		<p>[133] ‘No accidental position of a riband,’ wrote Mrs. Piozzi, ‘escaped him, so nice was his observation, and so rigorous his demands of propriety.’ Piozzi’s <i>Anec</i>. p. 287. Miss Burney says:⁠—‘Notwithstanding Johnson is sometimes so absent and always so near-sighted, he scrutinizes into every part of almost everybody’s appearance [at Streatham].’ And again she writes:⁠—‘his blindness is as much the effect of absence [of mind] as of infirmity, for he sees wonderfully at times. He can see the colour of a lady’s top-knot, for he very often finds fault with it.’ Mme. D’Arblays <i>Diary</i>, i. 85, ii. 174. ‘He could, when well, distinguish the hour on Lichfield town-clock.’ <i>Post</i>, p. 64.</p>
		<p>[134] See <i>post</i>, Sept. 22, 1777.</p>
		<p>[135] This was Dr. Swinfen’s opinion, who seems also to have attributed Johnson’s short-sightedness to the same cause. ‘My mother,’ he says, ‘thought my diseases derived from her family.’ <i>Annals</i>, p. 12. When he was put out at nurse, ‘She visited me,’ he says, ‘every day, and used to go different ways, that her assiduity might not expose her to ridicule.’</p>
		<p>[136] In 1738 Carte published a masterly ‘Account of Materials, etc., for a History of England with the method of his undertaking.’ (<i>Gent. Mag</i>. viii. 227.) He proposed to do much of what has been since done under the direction of the Master of the Rolls. He asked for subscriptions to carry on his great undertaking, for in its researches it was to be very great. In 1744 the City of London resolved to subscribe £50 for seven years (ib. xiv: 393). In vol. i. of his history, which only came down to the reign of John (published in 1748), he went out of his way to assert that the cure by the king’s touch was not due to the ‘regal <i>unction</i>‘; for he had known a man cured who had gone over to France, and had been there ‘touched by the eldest lineal descendant of a race of kings who had not at that time been crowned or <i>anointed</i>.’ (ib. xviii. 13.) Thereupon the Court of Common Council by a unanimous vote withdrew its subscription, (ib. 185.) The old Jacobites maintained that the power did not descend to Mary, William, or Anne. It was for this reason that Boswell said that Johnson should have been taken to Rome; though indeed it was not till some years after he was ‘touched’ by Queen Anne that the Pretender dwelt there. The Hanoverian kings never ‘touched.’ The service for the ceremony was printed in the <i>Book of Common Prayer</i> as late as 1719. (<i>Penny Cyclo</i>. xxi. 113.) ‘It appears by the newspapers of the time,’ says Mr. Wright, quoted by Croker, ‘that on March 30, 1712, two hundred persons were touched by Queen Anne.’ Macaulay says that ‘Charles the Second, in the course of his reign, touched near a hundred thousand persons.⁠ ⁠… The expense of the ceremony was little less than ten thousand pounds a year.’ Macaulay’s <i>England</i>, ch. xiv.</p>
		<p>[137] See <i>post</i>, p. 91, note.</p>
		<p>[138] <i>Anecdotes</i>, p. 10. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[139] Johnson, writing of Addison’s schoolmasters, says:⁠—‘Not to name the school or the masters of men illustrious for literature is a kind of historical fraud, by which honest fame is injuriously diminished. I would therefore trace him through the whole process of his education.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 418.</p>
		<p>[140] Neither the British Museum nor the Bodleian Library has a copy.</p>
		<p>[141] ‘When we learned <i>Propria qua maribus</i>, we were examined in the Accidence; particularly we formed verbs, that is, went through the same person in all the moods and tenses. This was very difficult to me, and I was once very anxious about the next day, when this exercise was to be performed in which I had failed till I was discouraged. My mother encouraged me, and I proceeded better. When I told her of my good escape, “We often,” said she, dear mother! “come off best when we are most afraid.” She told me that, once when she asked me about forming verbs I said, “I did not form them in an ugly shape.” “You could not,” said she “speak plain; and I was proud that I had a boy who was forming verbs” These little memorials soothe my mind.’ <i>Annals</i>, p. 22.</p>
		<p>[142] ‘This was the course of the school which I remember with pleasure; for I was indulged and caressed by my master; and, I think, really excelled the rest.’ <i>Annals</i>, p. 23.</p>
		<p>[143] Johnson said of Hunter:⁠—‘Abating his brutality, he was a very good master;’ <i>post</i>. March 21, 1772. Steele in the <i>Spectator</i>, No. 157, two years after Johnson’s birth, describes these savage tyrants of the grammar-schools. ‘The boasted liberty we talk of,’ he writes, ‘is but a mean reward for the long servitude, the many heartaches and terrors to which our childhood is exposed in going through a grammar school.⁠ ⁠… No one who has gone through what they call a great school but must remember to have seen children of excellent and ingenuous natures (as has afterwards appeared in their manhood); I say no man has passed through this way of education but must have seen an ingenuous creature expiring with shame, with pale looks, beseeching sorrow and silent tears, throw up its honest eyes and kneel or its tender kneeds to an inexorable blockhead to be forgiven the false quantity of a word in making a Latin verse.’ Likely enough Johnson’s roughness was in part due to this brutal treatment; for Steele goes on to say:⁠—‘It is wholly to this dreadful practise that we may attribute a certain hardiness and ferocity which some men, though liberally educated, carry about them in all their behaviour. To be bred like a gentleman, and punished like a malefactor, must, as we see it does, produce that illiberal sauciness which we see sometimes in men of letters.’</p>
		<p>[144] Johnson described him as ‘a peevish and ill-tempered man,’ and not so good a scholar or teacher as Taylor made out. Once the boys perceived that he did not understand a part of the Latin lesson; another time, when sent up to the upper-master to be punished, they had to complain that when they ‘could not get the passage,’ the assistant would not help them. <i>Annals</i>, pp. 26, 32.</p>
		<p>[145] One of the contributors to the <i>Athenian Letters</i>. See <i>Gent. Mag</i>. liv. 276.</p>
		<p>[146] Johnson, <i>post</i>, March 22, 1776, describes him as one ‘who does not get drunk, for he is a very pious man, but he is always muddy.’</p>
		<p>[147] A tradition had reached Johnson through his school-fellow Andrew Corbet that Addison had been at the school and had been the leader in a barring out. (Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 419.) Garrick entered the school about two years after Johnson left. According to Garrick’s biographer, Tom Davies (p. 3), ‘Hunter was an odd mixture of the pedant and the sportsman. Happy was the boy who could slily inform his offended master where a covey of partridges was to be found; this notice was a certain pledge of his pardon.’ Lord Campbell in his <i>Lives of the Chief Justices</i>, ii. 279, says:⁠—‘Hunter is celebrated for having flogged seven boys who afterwards sat as judges in the superior courts at Westminster at the same time. Among these were Chief Justice Wilmot, Lord Chancellor Northington, Sir T. Clarke, Master of the Rolls, Chief Justice Willes, and Chief Baron Parker. It is remarkable that, although Johnson and Wilmot were several years class-fellows at Lichfield, there never seems to have been the slightest intercourse between them in after life; but the Chief Justice used frequently to mention the Lexicographer as “a long, lank, lounging boy, whom he distinctly remembered to have been punished by Hunter for idleness.” Lord Campbell blunders here. Northington and Clarke were from Westminster School (Campbell’s <i>Chancellors</i>, v. 176). The schoolhouse, famous though it was, was allowed to fall into decay. A writer in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. in 1794 (p. 413) says that ‘it is now in a state of dilapidation, and unfit for the use of either the master or boys.’</p>
		<p>[148] Johnson’s observation to Dr. Rose, on this subject, deserves to be recorded. Rose was praising the mild treatment of children at school, at a time when flogging began to be less practised than formerly: ‘But then, (said Johnson,) they get nothing else: and what they gain at one end, they lose at the other.’ BURNEY. See <i>post</i>, under Dec. 17, 1775.</p>
		<p>[149] This passage is quoted from Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 24, 1773. Mr. Boyd had told Johnson that Lady Errol did not use force or fear in educating her children; whereupon he replied, ‘Sir, she is wrong,’ and continued in the words of the text.</p>
		<p>Gibbon in his <i>Autobiography</i> says:⁠—‘The domestic discipline of our ancestors has been relaxed by the philosophy and softness of the age: and if my father remembered that he had trembled before a stern parent, it was only to adopt with his son an opposite mode of behaviour.’ Gibbon’s <i>Works</i>, i. 112. Lord Chesterfield writing to a friend on Oct. 18, 1752, says:⁠—‘Pray let my godson never know what a blow or a whipping is, unless for those things for which, were he a man, he would deserve them; such as lying, cheating, making mischief, and meditated malice.’ Chesterfield’s <i>Misc. Works</i>, iv. 130.</p>
		<p>[150] Johnson, however, hated anything that came near to tyranny in the management of children. Writing to Mrs. Thrale, who had told him that she had on one occasion gone against the wish of her nurses, he said:⁠—‘That the nurses fretted will supply me during life with an additional motive to keep every child, as far as is possible, out of a nurse’s power. A nurse made of common mould will have a pride in overcoming a child’s reluctance. There are few minds to which tyranny is not delightful; power is nothing but as it is felt, and the delight of superiority is proportionate to the resistance overcome.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 67.</p>
		<p>[151] ‘Sword, I will hallow thee for this thy deed.’ 2 Henry VI, act iv. sc. 10. John Wesley’s mother, writing of the way she had brought up her children, boys and girls alike, says:⁠—‘When turned a year old (and some before) they were taught to fear the rod, and to cry softly; by which means they escaped abundance of correction they might otherwise have had.’ Wesley’s <i>Journal</i>, i. 370.</p>
		<p>[152] ‘There dwelt at Lichfield a gentleman of the name of Butt, to whose house on holidays he was ever welcome. The children in the family, perhaps offended with the rudeness of his behaviour, would frequently call him the great boy, which the father once overhearing said:⁠—‘You call him the great boy, but take my word for it, he will one day prove a great man.’ Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 6.</p>
		<p>[153] See <i>post</i>, March 22, 1776 and Johnson’s visit to Birmingham in Nov. 1784.</p>
		<p>[154] ‘You should never suffer your son to be idle one minute. I do not call play, of which he ought to have a good share, idleness; but I mean sitting still in a chair in total inaction; it makes boys lazy and indolent.’ Chesterfield’s <i>Misc. Works</i>, iv. 248.</p>
		<p>[155] The author of the <i>Reliques</i>.</p>
		<p>[156] The summer of 1764.</p>
		<p>[157] Johnson, writing of <i>Paradise Lost</i>, book ii. l. 879, says:⁠—‘In the history of <i>Don Bellianis</i>, when one of the knights approaches, as I remember, the castle of Brandezar, the gates are said to open, <i>grating harsh thunder upon their brazen hinges</i>.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 76. See <i>post</i>, March 27, 1776, where ‘he had with him upon a jaunt Il Palmerino d’Inghilterra.’ Prior says of Burke that ‘a very favourite study, as he once confessed in the House of Commons, was the old romances, <i>Palmerin of England</i> and <i>Don Belianis of Greece</i>, upon which he had wasted much valuable time.’ Prior’s <i>Burke</i>, p. 9.</p>
		<p>[158] Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 2) says that the uncle was Dr. Joseph Ford ‘a physician of great eminence.’ The son, Parson Ford, was Cornelius. In Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 15, 1773, Johnson mentions an uncle who very likely was Dr. Ford. In <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 5th S. v. 13, it is shown that by the will of the widow of Dr. Ford the Johnsons received £200 in 1722. On the same page the Ford pedigree is given, where it is seen that Johnson had an uncle Cornelius. It has been stated that ‘Johnson was brought up by his uncle till his fifteenth year.’ I understand Boswell to say that Johnson, after leaving Lichfield School, resided for some time with his uncle before going to Stourbridge.</p>
		<p>[159] He is said to be the original of the parson in Hogarth’s <i>Modern Midnight Conversation</i>. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>In the <i>Life of Fenton</i> Johnson describes Ford as ‘a clergyman at that time too well known, whose abilities, instead of furnishing convivial merriment to the voluptuous and dissolute, might have enabled him to excel among the virtuous and the wise.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 57. Writing to Mrs. Thrale on July 8, 1771, he says, ‘I would have been glad to go to Hagley [close to Stourbridge] for I should have had the opportunity of recollecting past times, and wandering <i>per montes notos et flumina nota</i>, of recalling the images of sixteen, and reviewing my conversations with poor Ford.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 42. See also <i>post</i>, May 12, 1778.</p>
		<p>[160] See <i>post</i>, April 20, 1781.</p>
		<p>[161] As was likewise the Bishop of Dromore many years afterwards. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[162] Mr. Hector informs me, that this was made almost <i>impromptu</i>, in his presence. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[163] This he inserted, with many alterations, in the <i>Gentleman’s Magazine</i>, 1743 [p. 378]. BOSWELL. The alterations are not always for the better. Thus he alters</p>
		<p>‘And the long honours of a lasting name’</p>
		<p>into</p>
		<p>‘And fir’d with pleasing hope of endless fame.’</p>
		<p>[164] Settle was the last of the city-poets; <i>post</i>, May 15, 1776.</p>
		<p>[165] ‘Here swells the shelf with Ogilby the great.’ Dunciad, i. 141.</p>
		<p>[166] Some young ladies at Lichfield having proposed to act <i>The Distressed Mother</i>, Johnson wrote this, and gave it to Mr. Hector to convey it privately to them. BOSWELL. See <i>post</i>, 1747, for <i>The Distressed Mother</i>.</p>
		<p>[167] Yet he said to Boswell:⁠—‘Sir, in my early years I read very hard. It is a sad reflection, but a true one, that I knew almost as much at eighteen as I do now’ (<i>post</i>, July 21, 1763). He told Mr. Langton, that ‘his great period of study was from the age of twelve to that of eighteen’ (Ib. note). He told the King that his reading had later on been hindered by ill-health (<i>post</i>, Feb. 1767).</p>
		<p>[168] Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 9) says that his father took him home, probably with a view to bring him up to his own trade; for I have heard Johnson say that he himself was able to bind a book. ‘It were better bind books again,’ wrote Mrs. Thrale to him on Sept. 18, 1777, ‘as you did one year in our thatched summer-house.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 375. It was most likely at this time that he refused to attend his father to Uttoxeter market, for which fault he made atonement in his old age (<i>post</i>, November, 1784).</p>
		<p>[169] Perhaps Johnson had his own early reading in mind when he thus describes Pope’s reading at about the same age. ‘During this period of his life he was indefatigably diligent and insatiably curious; wanting health for violent, and money for expensive pleasures, and having excited in himself very strong desires of intellectual eminence, he spent much of his time over his books; but he read only to store his mind with facts and images, seizing all that his authors presented with undistinguishing voracity, and with an appetite for knowledge too eager to be nice.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 239.</p>
		<p>[170] Andrew Corbet, according to Hawkins. Corbet had entered Pembroke College in 1727. Dr. Swinfen, Johnson’s god-father, was a member of the College. I find the name of a Swinfen on the books in 1728.</p>
		<p>[171] In the Caution Book of Pembroke College are found the two following entries:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Oct. 31, 1728. Recd. then of Mr. Samuel Johnson Commr. of Pem. Coll. ye summ of seven Pounds for his Caution, which is to remain in ye Hands of ye Bursars till ye said Mr. Johnson shall depart ye said College leaving ye same fully discharg’d.</p>
		<p>Recd. by me, John Ratcliff, Bursar.’</p>
		<p>‘March 26, 1740. At a convention of the Master and Fellows to settle the accounts of the Caution it appear’d that the Persons Accounts underwritten stood thus at their leaving the College:</p>
		<p>Caution not Repay’d<br/>
		Mr. Johnson £7 0 0<br/>
		Battells not discharg’d<br/>
		Mr. Johnson £7 0 0<br/></p>
		<p>Mr. Carlyle is in error in describing Johnson as a servitor. He was a commoner as the above entry shows. Though he entered on Oct. 31, he did not matriculate till Dec. 16. It was on Palm Sunday of this same year that Rousseau left Geneva, and so entered upon his eventful career. Goldsmith was born eleven days after Johnson entered (Nov. 10, 1728). Reynolds was five years old. Burke was born before Johnson left Oxford.</p>
		<p>[172] He was in his twentieth year. He was born on Sept. 18, 1709, and was therefore nineteen. He was somewhat late in entering. In his <i>Life of Ascham</i> he says, ‘Ascham took his bachelor’s degree in 1534, in the eighteenth year of his age; a time of life at which it is more common now to enter the universities than to take degrees.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 505. It was just after Johnson’s entrance that the two Wesleys began to hold small devotional meetings at Oxford.</p>
		<p>[173] Builders were at work in the college during all his residence. ‘July 16, 1728. About a quarter of a year since they began to build a new chapel for Pembroke Coll. next to Slaughter Lane.’ Hearne’s <i>Remains</i>, iii. 9.</p>
		<p>[174] <i>Athen. Oxon</i>. edit. 1721, i. 627. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[175] Johnson would oftener risk the payment of a small fine than attend his lectures.⁠ ⁠… Upon occasion of one such imposition he said to Jorden:⁠—“Sir, you have sconced [fined] me two pence for non-attendance at a lecture not worth a penny.” Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 9. A passage in Whitefield’s <i>Diary</i> shows that the sconce was often greater. He once neglected to give in the weekly theme which every Saturday had to be given to the tutor in the Hall ‘when the bell rang.’ He was fined half-a-crown. Tyerman’s <i>Whitefield</i>, i. 22. In my time (1855⁠–⁠8) at Pembroke College every Saturday when the bell rang we gave in our piece of Latin prose⁠—themes were things of the past.</p>
		<p>[176] This was on Nov. 6, O.S., or Nov. 17, N.S.⁠—a very early time for ice to bear. The first mention of frost that I find in the newspapers of that winter is in the <i>Weekly Journal</i> for Nov. 30, O.S.; where it is stated that ‘the passage by land and water [i.e. the Thames] is now become very dangerous by the snow, frost, and ice.’ The record of meteorological observations began a few years later.</p>
		<p>[177] Oxford, 20th March, 1776. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[178] Mr. Croker discovers a great difference between this account and that which Johnson gave to Mr. Warton (<i>post</i>, under July 16, 1754). There is no need to have recourse, with Mr. Croker, ‘to an ear spoiled by flattery.’ A very simple explanation may be found. The accounts refer to different hours of the same day. Johnson’s ‘stark insensibility’ belonged to the morning, and his ‘beating heart’ to the afternoon. He had been impertinent before dinner, and when he was sent for after dinner ‘he expected a sharp rebuke.’</p>
		<p>[179] It ought to be remembered that Dr. Johnson was apt, in his literary as well as moral exercises, to overcharge his defects. Dr. Adams informed me, that he attended his tutors lectures, and also the lectures in the College Hall, very regularly. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[180] Early in every November was kept ‘a great gaudy [feast] in the college, when the Master dined in publick, and the juniors (by an ancient custom they were obliged to comply with) went round the fire in the hall.’ Philipps’s <i>Diary, Notes and Queries</i>, 2nd S., x. 443. We can picture to ourselves among the juniors in November 1728, Samuel Johnson, going round the fire with the others. Here he heard day after day the Latin grace which Camden had composed for the society. ‘I believe I can repeat it,’ Johnson said at St. Andrew’s, ‘which he did.’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 19, 1773.</p>
		<p>[181] Seven years before Johnson’s time, on Nov. 5, ‘Mr. Peyne, Bachelor of Arts, made an oration in the hall suitable to the day.’ Philipps’s <i>Diary</i>.</p>
		<p>[182] Boswell forgot Johnson’s criticism on Milton’s exercises on this day. ‘Some of the exercises on Gunpowder Treason might have been spared.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 119.</p>
		<p>[183] It has not been preserved. There are in the college library four of his compositions, two of verse and two of prose. One of the copies of verse I give <i>post</i>, under July 16, 1754. Both have been often printed. As his prose compositions have never been published I will give one:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Mea nec Falernae<br/>
		Temperant Vites, neque Formiani Pocula Colles.’<br/></p>
		<p>‘Quaedam minus attente spectata absurda videntur, quae tamen penitus perspecta rationi sunt consentanea. Non enim semper facta per se, verum ratio occasioque faciendi sunt cogitanda. Deteriora ei offerre cui meliorum ingens copia est, cui non ridiculum videtur? Quis sanus hirtam agrestemque vestem Lucullo obtulisset, cujus omnia fere Serum opificia, omnia Parmae vellera, omnes Tyri colores latuerunt? Hoc tamen fecisse Horatium non puduit, quo nullus urbanior, nullus procerum convictui magis assuetus. Maecenatem scilicet nôrat non quaesiturum an meliora vina domi posset bibere, verum an inter domesticos quenquam propensiori in se animo posset invenire. Amorem, non lucrum, optavit patronus ille munifentissimus (<i>sic</i>). Pocula licet vino minus puro implerentur, satis habuit, si hospitis vultus laetitia perfusus sinceram puramque amicitiam testaretur. Ut ubi poetam carmine celebramus, non fastidit, quod ipse melius posset scribere, verum poema licet non magni facit (<i>sic</i>), amorem scriptoris libenter amplectitur, sic amici munuscula animum gratum testantia licet parvi sint, non nisi a superbo et moroso contemnentur. Deos thuris fumis indigere nemo certè unquam credidit, quos tamen iis gratos putarunt, quia homines se non beneficiorum immemores his testimoniis ostenderunt.’</p>
		<h5>JOHNSON.</h5>
		<p>[184] ‘The accidental perusal of some Latin verses gained Addison the patronage of Dr. Lancaster, afterwards Provost of Queen’s College, by whose recommendation he was elected into Magdalen College as a Demy’ [a scholar]. Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 420. Johnson’s verses gained him nothing but ‘estimation.’</p>
		<p>[185] He is reported to have said:⁠—‘The writer of this poem will leave it a question for posterity, whether his or mine be the original.’ Hawkins, p. 13.</p>
		<p>[186] ‘A Miscellany of Poems by several hands. Published by J. Husbands, A.M., Fellow of Pembroke College, Oxon., Oxford. Printed by Leon. Lichfield, near the East-Gate, In the year MDCCXXXI.’ Among the subscribers I notice the name of Richard Savage, Esq., for twenty copies. It is very doubtful whether he paid for one. Pope did not subscribe. Johnson’s poem is thus mentioned in the preface:⁠—‘The translation of Mr. Pope’s Messiah was deliver’d to his Tutor as a College Exercise by Mr. Johnson, a commoner of Pembroke College in Oxford, and ‘ ’tis hoped will be no discredit to the excellent original.’</p>
		<p>[187] See <i>post</i>, under July 16, 1754.</p>
		<p>[188] See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 6, 1773.</p>
		<p>[189] <i>Poetical Review of the Literary and Moral Character of Dr. Johnson,</i> by John Courtenay, Esq., M.P. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[190] Hector, in his account of Johnson’s early life, says:⁠—‘After a long absence from Lichfield, when he returned, I was apprehensive of something wrong in his constitution which might either impair his intellect or endanger his life; but, thanks to Almighty God, my fears have proved false.’ Hawkins, p. 8. The college books show that Johnson was absent but one week in the Long Vacation of 1729. It is by no means unlikely that he went to Lichfield in that week to consult Dr. Swinfen about his health. In that case his first attack, when he tried to overcome the malady by frequently walking to Birmingham, must have been at an earlier date. In his time students often passed the vacation at the University. The following table shows the number of graduates and undergraduates in residence in Pembroke College at the end of each fourth week, from June to December 1729:⁠—</p>
		<p>Members in residence.<br/>
		 June 20, 1729⁠ ⁠… 54<br/>
		 July 18, ”⁠ ⁠… 34<br/>
		 Aug. 15, ”⁠ ⁠… 25<br/>
		 Sept. 12, ”⁠ ⁠… 16<br/>
		 Oct. 10, ”⁠ ⁠… 30<br/>
		 Nov. 7, ”⁠ ⁠… 52<br/>
		 Dec. 5, ”⁠ ⁠… 49<br/></p>
		<p>At Christmas there were still sixteen men left in the college. That under a zealous tutor the vacation was by no means a time of idleness is shown by a passage in Wesley’s <i>Journal</i>, in which he compares the Scotch Universities with the English. ‘In Scotland,’ he writes, ‘the students all come to their several colleges in November, and return home in May. So they <i>may</i> study five months in the year, and lounge all the rest! O where was the common sense of those who instituted such colleges? In the English colleges everyone <i>may</i> reside all the year, as all my pupils did; and I should have thought myself little better than a highwayman if I had not lectured them every day in the year but Sundays.’ Wesley’s <i>Journal</i>, iv. 75. Johnson lived to see Oxford empty in the Long Vacation. Writing on Aug. 1, 1775, he said:⁠—‘The place is now a sullen solitude.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 294.</p>
		<p>[191] Johnson, perhaps, was thinking of himself when he thus criticised the character of Sir Roger de Coverley. ‘The variable weather of the mind, the flying vapours of incipient madness, which from time to time cloud reason without eclipsing it, it requires so much nicety to exhibit that Addison seems to have been deterred from prosecuting his own design.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 431.</p>
		<p>[192] Writing in his old age to Hector, he said⁠—‘My health has been from my twentieth year such as has seldom afforded me a single day of ease’ (<i>post</i>, under March 21, 1782). Hawkins writes, that he once told him ‘that he knew not what it was to be totally free from pain.’ Hawkins, p. 396.</p>
		<p>[193] See <i>post</i>, Oct. 27, 1784, note.</p>
		<p>[194] In the <i>Rambler</i>, No. 85, he pointed out ‘how much happiness is gained, and how much misery escaped, by frequent and violent agitation of the body.’ See <i>post</i>, July 21, 1763, for his remedies against melancholy.</p>
		<p>[195] Thirty-two miles in all. Southey mentions that in 1728, the Wesleys, to save the more money for the poor, began to perform their journeys on foot. He adds⁠—‘It was so little the custom in that age for men in their rank of life to walk any distance, as to make them think it a discovery that four or five-and-twenty miles are an easy and safe day’s journey.’ Southey’s <i>Wesley</i>, i. 52.</p>
		<p>[196] Boswell himself suffered from hypochondria. He seems at times to boast of it, as Dogberry boasted of his losses; so that Johnson had some reason for writing to him with seventy, as if he were ‘affecting it from a desire of distinction.’ <i>Post</i>, July 2, 1776.</p>
		<p>[197] Johnson on April 7, 1776, recommended Boswell to read this book, and again on July 2 of the same year.</p>
		<p>[198] On Dec. 24, 1754, writing of the poet Collins, who was either mad or close upon it, he said⁠—‘Poor dear Collins! I have often been near his state.’ Wooll’s <i>Warton</i>, p. 229. ‘I inherited,’ Johnson said, ‘a vile melancholy from my father, which has made me mad all my life, at least not sober.’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 16, 1773. ‘When I survey my past life,’ he wrote in 1777, ‘I discover nothing but a barren waste of time, with some disorders of body and disturbances of the mind very near to madness.’ <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 155. Reynolds recorded that ‘what Dr. Johnson said a few days before his death of his disposition to insanity was no new discovery to those who were intimate with him.’ Taylor’s <i>Reynolds</i>, ii. 455. See also <i>post</i> Sept. 20, 1777.</p>
		<p>[199] Ch. 44.</p>
		<p>[200] ‘Of the uncertainties of our present state, the most dreadful and alarming is the uncertain continuance of reason.’ <i>Rasselas</i>, ch. 43.</p>
		<p>[201] Boswell refers to Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>., pp. 77, 127), and Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, pp. 287⁠–⁠8).</p>
		<p>[202] ‘Quick in these seeds is might of fire and birth of heavenly place.’ Morris, <i>Aeneids</i>, vi. 730.</p>
		<p>[203] On Easter Sunday 1716 during service some pieces of stone from the spire of St. Mary’s fell on the roof of the church. The congregation, thinking that the steeple was coming down, in their alarm broke through the windows. Johnson, we may well believe, witnessed the scene. The church was pulled down, and the new one was opened in Dec. 1721. Harwood’s <i>Lichfield</i>, p. 460.</p>
		<p>[204] ‘Sept. 23, 1771. I have gone voluntarily to church on the week day but few times in my life. I think to mend. April 9, 1773. I hope in time to take pleasure in public worship. April 6, 1777. I have this year omitted church on most Sundays, intending to supply the deficience in the week. So that I owe twelve attendances on worship. I will make no more such superstitious stipulations, which entangle the mind with unbidden obligations.’ <i>Pr. and Med</i>. pp. 108, 121, 161. In the following passage in the <i>Life of Milton</i>, Johnson, no doubt, is thinking of himself:⁠—‘In the distribution of his hours there was no hour of prayer, either solitary or with his household; omitting public prayers he omitted all.⁠ ⁠… That he lived without prayer can hardly be affirmed; his studies and meditations were an habitual prayer. The neglect of it in his family was probably a fault for which he condemned himself, and which he intended to correct, but that death as too often happens, intercepted his reformation.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 115. See <i>post</i>, Oct. 10, 1779.</p>
		<p>[205] We may compare with this a passage in Verecundulus’s letter in <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 157:⁠—‘Though many among my fellow students [at the university] took the opportunity of a more remiss discipline to gratify their passions, yet virtue preserved her natural superiority, and those who ventured to neglect were not suffered to insult her.’ Oxford at this date was somewhat wayward in her love for religion. Whitefield records:⁠—‘I had no sooner received the sacrament publicly on a week-day at St. Mary’s, but I was set up as a mark for all the polite students that knew me to shoot at. By this they knew that I was commenced Methodist, for though there is a sacrament at the beginning of every term, at which all, especially the seniors, are by statute obliged to be present, yet so dreadfully has that once faithful city played the harlot, that very few masters, and no undergraduates but the Methodists attended upon it. I daily underwent some contempt at college. Some have thrown dirt at me; others by degrees took away their pay from me.’ Tyerman’s <i>Whitefield</i>, i. 19. Story, the Quaker, visiting Oxford in 1731, says, ‘Of all places wherever I have been the scholars of Oxford were the rudest, most giddy, and unruly rabble, and most mischievous.’ Story’s <i>Journal</i>, p. 675.</p>
		<p>[206] John Wesley, who was also at Oxford, writing of about this same year, says:⁠—‘Meeting now with Mr. Law’s <i>Christian Perfection</i> and <i>Serious Call</i> the light flowed in so mightily upon my soul that everything appeared in a new view.’ Wesley’s <i>Journal</i>, i. 94. Whitefield writes:⁠—‘Before I went to the University, I met with Mr. Law’s <i>Serious Call</i>, but had not then money to purchase it. Soon after my coming up to the University, seeing a small edition of it in a friend’s hand I soon procured it. God worked powerfully upon my soul by that and his other excellent treatise upon Christian perfection.’ Tyerman’s <i>Whitefield</i>, i. 16. Johnson called the <i>Serious Call</i> ‘the finest piece of hortatory theology in any language;’ <i>post</i>, 1770. A few months before his death he said:⁠—‘William Law wrote the best piece of parenetic divinity; but William Law was no reasoner;’ <i>post</i>, June 9, 1784. Law was the tutor of Gibbon’s father, and he died in the house of the historian’s aunt. In describing the <i>Serious Call</i> Gibbon says:⁠—‘His precepts are rigid, but they are founded on the gospel; his satire is sharp, but it is drawn from the knowledge of human life; and many of his portraits are not unworthy of the pen of La Bruyère. If he finds a spark of piety in his reader’s mind he will soon kindle it to a flame.’ Gibbon’s <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 21.</p>
		<p>[207] Mrs. Piozzi has given a strange fantastical account of the original of Dr. Johnson’s belief in our most holy religion. ‘At the age of ten years his mind was disturbed by scruples of infidelity, which preyed upon his spirits, and made him very uneasy, the more so, as he revealed his uneasiness to none, being naturally (as he said) of a sullen temper, and reserved disposition. He searched, however, diligently, but fruitlessly, for evidences of the truth of revelation; and, at length, <i>recollecting</i> a book he had once seen [<i>I suppose at five years old</i>] in his father’s shop, intitled <i>De veritate Religionis</i>, etc., he began to think himself <i>highly culpable</i> for neglecting such a means of information, and took himself severely to task for this sin, adding many acts of voluntary, and, to others, unknown <i>penance</i>. The first opportunity which offered, of course, he seized the book with avidity; but, on examination, <i>not finding himself scholar enough to peruse its contents</i>, set his heart at rest; and not thinking to enquire whether there were any English books written on the subject, followed his usual amusements and <i>considered his conscience as lightened of a crime</i>. He redoubled his diligence to learn the language that contained the information he most wished for; but from the pain which <i>guilt [namely having omitted to read what he did not understand</i>,] had given him, he now began to deduce the soul’s immortality [<i>a sensation of pain in this world being an unquestionable proof of existence in another</i>], which was the point that belief first stopped at; <i>and from that moment resolving to be a Christian</i>, became one of the most zealous and pious ones our nation ever produced.’ <i>Anecdotes</i>, p. 17.</p>
		<p>This is one of the numerous misrepresentations of this lively lady, which it is worth while to correct; for if credit should be given to such a childish, irrational, and ridiculous statement of the foundation of Dr. Johnson’s faith in Christianity, how little credit would be due to it. Mrs. Piozzi seems to wish, that the world should think Dr. Johnson also under the influence of that easy logick, <i>Stet pro ratione voluntas</i>. BOSWELL. On April 28, 1783, Johnson said:⁠—‘Religion had dropped out of my mind. It was at an early part of my life. Sickness brought it back, and I hope I have never lost it since.’ Most likely it was the sickness in the long vacation of 1729 mentioned <i>ante</i>, p. 63.</p>
		<p>[208] In his <i>Life of Milton</i>, writing of <i>Paradise Lost</i>, he says:⁠—‘But these truths are too important to be new; they have been taught to our infancy; they have mingled with our solitary thoughts and familiar conversations, and are habitually interwoven with the whole texture of life.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 134.</p>
		<p>[209] Acts xvi. 30.</p>
		<p>[210] Sept. 7, Old Style, or Sept. 18, New Style.</p>
		<p>[211] ‘He that peruses Shakespeare looks round alarmed, and starts to find himself alone.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 71. ‘I was many years ago so shocked by Cordelia’s death, that I know not whether I ever endured to read again the last scenes of the play till I undertook to revise them as an editor.’ Ib. p. 175.</p>
		<p>[212] He told Mr. Windham that he had never read through the Odyssey completely. Windham’s <i>Diary</i>, p. 17. At college, he said, he had been ‘very idle and neglectful of his studies.’ Ib.</p>
		<p>[213] ‘It may be questioned whether, except his Bible, he ever read a book entirely through. Late in life, if any man praised a book in his presence, he was sure to ask, ‘Did you read it through?’ If the answer was in the affirmative, he did not seem willing to believe it.’ Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 12. It would be easy to show that Johnson read many books right through, though, according to Mrs. Piozzi, he asked, ‘was there ever yet anything written by mere man that was wished longer by its readers excepting Don Quixote, Robinson Crusoe, and the Pilgrim’s Progress?’ Piozzi’s Anec., p. 281. Nevertheless in Murphy’s statement there is some truth. See what has been just stated by Boswell, that ‘he hardly ever read any poem to an end,’ and <i>post</i>, April 19, 1773 and June 15, 1784. To him might be applied his own description of Barretier:⁠—‘He had a quickness of apprehension and firmness of memory which enabled him to read with incredible rapidity, and at the same time to retain what he read, so as to be able to recollect and apply it. He turned over volumes in an instant, and selected what was useful for his purpose.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 390.</p>
		<p>[214] See <i>post</i>, June 15, 1784. Mr. Windham (<i>Diary</i>, p. 17) records the following ‘anecdote of Johnson’s first declamation at college; having neglected to write it till the morning of his being (sic) to repeat it, and having only one copy, he got part of it by heart while he was walking into the hall, and the rest he supplied as well as he could extempore.’ Mrs. Piozzi, recording the same ancedote, says that ‘having given the copy into the hand of the tutor who stood to receive it as he passed, he was obliged to begin by chance, and continue on how he could.⁠ ⁠… “A prodigious risk, however,” said some one. “Not at all,” exclaims Johnson, “no man, I suppose, leaps at once into deep water who does not know how to swim.” ’ Piozzi’s <i>Anec</i>. p. 30.</p>
		<p>[215] He told Dr. Burney that he never wrote any of his works that were printed, twice over. Dr. Burney’s wonder at seeing several pages of his <i>Lives of the Poets</i>, in Manuscript, with scarce a blot or erasure, drew this observation from him. MALONE. ‘He wrote forty-eight of the printed octavo pages of the <i>Life of Savage</i> at a sitting’ (<i>post</i>, Feb. 1744), and a hundred lines of the <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i> in a day (<i>post</i>, under Feb. 15, 1766). The <i>Ramblers</i> were written in haste as the moment pressed, without even being read over by him before they were printed (<i>post</i>, beginning of 1750). In the second edition, however, he made corrections. ‘He composed <i>Rasselas</i> in the evenings of one week’ (<i>post</i>, under January, 1759). ‘<i>The False Alarm</i> was written between eight o’clock on Wednesday night and twelve o’clock on Thursday night.’ Piozzi’s <i>Anec</i>., p. 41. ‘<i>The Patriot</i>‘ he says, ‘was called for on Friday, was written on Saturday’ (<i>post</i>, Nov. 26, 1774).</p>
		<p>[216] ‘When Mr. Johnson felt his fancy, or fancied he felt it, disordered, his constant recurrence was to the study of arithmetic.’ Piozzi’s <i>Anec</i>. p. 77. ‘Ethics, or figures, or metaphysical reasoning, was the sort of talk he most delighted in;’ ib. p. 80. See <i>post</i>, Sept. 24, 1777.</p>
		<p>[217] ‘Sept. 18, 1764, I resolve to study the Scriptures; I hope in the original languages. 640 verses every Sunday will nearly comprise the Scriptures in a year.’ <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 58. ’1770, 1st Sunday after Easter. The plan which I formed for reading the Scriptures was to read 600 verses in the Old Testament, and 200 in the New, every week;’ ib. p. 100.</p>
		<p>[218] ‘August 1, 1715. This being the day on which the late Queen Anne died, and on which George, Duke and Elector of Brunswick, usurped the English throne, there was very little rejoicing in Oxford.⁠ ⁠… There was a sermon at St. Marie’s by Dr. Panting, Master of Pembroke.⁠ ⁠… He is an honest gent. His sermon took no notice, at most very little, of the Duke of Brunswick.’ Hearne’s <i>Remains</i>, ii. 6.</p>
		<p>[219] The outside wall of the gateway-tower forms an angle with the wall of the Master’s house, so that any one sitting by the open window and speaking in a strong emphatic voice might have easily been overheard.</p>
		<p>[220] Goldsmith did go to Padua, and stayed there some months. Forster’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 71.</p>
		<p>[221] I had this anecdote from Dr. Adams, and Dr. Johnson confirmed it. Bramston, in his <i>Man of Taste</i>, has the same thought: ‘Sure, of all blockheads, scholars are the worst.’ BOSWELL. Johnson’s meaning, however, is, that a scholar who is a blockhead must be the worst of all blockheads, because he is without excuse. But Bramston, in the assumed character of an ignorant coxcomb, maintains that <i>all</i> scholars are blockheads on account of their scholarship. J. BOSWELL, JUN. There is, I believe, a Spanish proverb to the effect that, ‘to be an utter fool a man must know Latin.’ A writer in <i>Notes and Queries</i> (5th S. xii. 285) suggests that Johnson had in mind Acts xvii. 21.</p>
		<p>[222] It was the practice in his time for a servitor, by order of the Master, to go round to the rooms of the young men, and knocking at the door to enquire if they were within; and if no answer was returned to report them absent. Johnson could not endure this intrusion, and would frequently be silent, when the utterance of a word would have ensured him from censure, and would join with others of the young men in the college in hunting, as they called it, the servitor who was thus diligent in his duty, and this they did with the noise of pots and candlesticks, singing to the tune of Chevy Chase the words in the old ballad⁠—</p>
		<p>‘To drive the deer with hound and horn!’ <i>Hawkins</i>, p. 12. Whitefield, writing of a few years later, says:⁠—‘At this time Satan used to terrify me much, and threatened to punish me if I discovered his wiles. It being my duty, as servitor, in my turn to knock at the gentlemen’s rooms by ten at night, to see who were in their rooms, I thought the devil would appear to me every stair I went up.’ Tyerman’s <i>Whitefield</i>, i. 20.</p>
		<p>[223] See <i>post</i>, June 12, 1784.</p>
		<p>[224] Perhaps his disregard of all authority was in part due to his genius, still in its youth. In his <i>Life of Lyttelton</i> he says:⁠—‘The letters [Lyttelton’s <i>Persian Letters</i>] have something of that indistinct and headstrong ardour for liberty which a man of genius always catches when he enters the world, and always suffers to cool as he passes forward.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 488.</p>
		<p>[225] Dr. Hall [formerly Master of the College] says, ‘Certainly not all.’ CROKER.</p>
		<p>[226] ‘I would leave the interest of the fortune I bequeathed to a college to my relations or my friends for their lives. It is the same thing to a college, which is a permanent society, whether it gets the money now or twenty years hence; and I would wish to make my relations or friends feel the benefit of it;’ <i>post</i>, April 17, 1778. Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 582,) says that ‘he meditated a devise of his house to the corporation of that city for a charitable use, but, it being freehold he said, “I cannot live a twelvemonth, and the last statute of Mortmain stands in my way.” ’ The same statute, no doubt, would have hindered the bequest to the College.</p>
		<p>[227] Garrick refused to act one of Hawkins’s plays. The poet towards the end of a long letter which he signed⁠—‘Your much dissatisfied humble servant,’ said:⁠—‘After all, Sir, I do not desire to come to an open rupture with you. I wish not to exasperate, but to convince; and I tender you once more my friendship and my play.’ <i>Garrick Corres</i>. ii. 8. See <i>post</i>, April 9, 1778.</p>
		<p>[228] See Nash’s <i>History of Worcestershire</i>, vol. i. p. 529. BOSWELL. To the list should be added, Francis Beaumont, the dramatic writer; Sir Thomas Browne, whose life Johnson wrote; Sir James Dyer, Chief Justice of the King’s Bench, Lord Chancellor Harcourt, John Pym, Francis Rous, the Speaker of Cromwell’s parliament, and Bishop Bonner. WRIGHT. Some of these men belonged to the ancient foundation of Broadgates Hall, which in 1624 was converted into Pembroke College. It is strange that Boswell should have passed over Sir Thomas Browne’s name. Johnson in his life of Browne says that he was ‘the first man of eminence graduated from the new college, to which the zeal or gratitude of those that love it most can wish little better than that it may long proceed as it began.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 476. To this list Nash adds the name of the Revd. Richard Graves, author of <i>The Spiritual Quixote</i>, who took his degree of B.A. on the same day as Whitefield, whom he ridiculed in that romance.</p>
		<p>[229] See <i>post</i>, Oct. 6, 1769, and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 15, 1773.</p>
		<p>[230] In his <i>Life of Shenstone</i> he writes:⁠—‘From school Shenstone was sent to Pembroke College in Oxford, a society which for half a century has been eminent for English poetry and elegant literature. Here it appears that he found delight and advantage; for he continued his name in the book ten years, though he took no degree.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 408. Johnson’s name would seem to have been in like manner continued for more than eleven years, and perhaps for the same reasons. (<i>Ante</i>, p. 58 note.) Hannah More was at Oxford in June 1782, during one of Johnson’s visits to Dr. Adams. ‘You cannot imagine,’ she writes, ‘with what delight Dr. Johnson showed me every part of his own college.⁠ ⁠… After dinner he begged to conduct me to see the college; he would let no one show it me but himself. “This was my room; this Shenstone’s.” Then, after pointing out all the rooms of the poets who had been of his college, “In short,” said he, “we were a nest of singing-birds. Here we walked, there we played at cricket.” [It may be doubted whether he ever played.] He ran over with pleasure the history of the juvenile days he passed there. When we came into the Common Room, we spied a fine large print of Johnson, framed and hung up that very morning, with this motto: “And is not Johnson ours, himself a host;” under which stared you in the face, “From Miss More’s <i>Sensibility</i>“ ’ Hannah More’s <i>Memoirs</i>, i. 261. At the end of ‘the ludicrous analysis of Pocockius’ quoted by Johnson in the <i>Life of Edmund Smith</i> are the following lines:⁠—‘Subito ad Batavos proficiscor, lauro ab illis donandus. Prius vero Pembrochienses voco ad certamen poeticum.’ Smith was at Christ Church. He seems to be mocking the neighbouring ‘nest of singing-birds.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 381.</p>
		<p>[231] Taylor matriculated on Feb. 24, 1729. Mr. Croker in his note has confounded him with another John Taylor who matriculated more than a year later. Richard West, writing of Christ Church in 1735, says:⁠—‘Consider me very seriously here in a strange country, inhabited by things that call themselves Doctors and Masters of Arts; a country flowing with syllogisms and ale, where Horace and Virgil are equally unknown.’ Gray’s <i>Letters</i>, ii. I.</p>
		<p>[232]</p>
		<p>‘Si toga sordidula est et rupta<br/>
		 calceus alter<br/>
		Pelle patet.’<br/>
		‘Or if the shoe be ript, or patches put.’<br/></p>
		<p>Dryden, <i>Juvenal</i>, iii. 149.</p>
		<p>Johnson in his <i>London</i>, in describing ‘the blockhead’s insults,’ while he mentions ‘the tattered cloak,’ passes over the ript shoe. Perhaps the wound had gone too deep to his generous heart for him to bear even to think on it.</p>
		<p>[233] ‘Yet some have refused my bounties, more offended with my quickness to detect their wants than pleased with my readiness to succour them.’ <i>Rasselas</i>, ch. 25. ‘His [Savage’s] distresses, however afflictive, never dejected him; in his lowest state he wanted not spirit to assert the natural dignity of wit, and was always ready to repress that insolence which the superiority of fortune incited;⁠ ⁠… he never admitted any gross familiarities, or submitted to be treated otherwise than as an equal.⁠ ⁠… His clothes were worn out; and he received notice that at a coffee-house some clothes and linen were left for him.⁠ ⁠… But though the offer was so far generous, it was made with some neglect of ceremonies, which Mr. Savage so much resented that he refused the present, and declined to enter the house till the clothes that had been designed for him were taken away.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 161 and 169.</p>
		<p>[234]</p>
		<p>‘Haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat Res angusta domi.’</p>
		<p>Juvenal, <i>Sat</i>. iii. 164.</p>
		<p>Paraphrased by Johnson in his <i>London</i>, ‘Slow rises worth by poverty depressed.’</p>
		<p>[235] Cambridge thirty-six years later neglected Parr as Oxford neglected Johnson. Both these men had to leave the University through poverty. There were no open scholarships in those days.</p>
		<p>[236] Yet his college bills came to only some eight shillings a week. As this was about the average amount of an undergraduate’s bill it is clear that, so far as food went, he lived, in spite of Mr. Carlyle’s assertion, as well as his fellow-students.</p>
		<p>[237] Mr. Croker states that ‘an examination of the college books proves that Johnson, who entered on the 31st October, 1728, remained there, even during the vacations, to the 12th December, 1729, when he personally left the college, and never returned⁠—though his <i>name</i> remained on the books till 8th October, 1731.’ I have gone into this question at great length in my <i>Dr. Johnson: His Friends and His Critics</i>, p. 329. I am of opinion that Mr. Croker’s general conclusion is right. The proof of residence is established, and alone established, by the entries in the buttery books. Now these entries show that Johnson, with the exception of the week in October 1729 ending on the 24th, was in residence till December 12, 1729. He seems to have returned for a week in March 1730, and again for a week in the following September. On three other weeks there is a charge against him of fivepence in the books. Mr. Croker has made that darker which was already dark enough by confounding, as I have shewn, two John Taylors who both matriculated at Christ Church. Boswell’s statement no doubt is precise, but in this he followed perhaps the account given by Hawkins. He would have been less likely to discover Hawkins’s error from the fact that, as Johnson’s name was for about three years on the College books, he was so long, in name at least, a member of the College. Had Boswell seen Johnson’s letter to Mr. Hickman, quoted by Mr. Croker (Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, p. 20), he would at once have seen that Johnson could not have remained at college for a little more than three years. For within three years all but a day of his entrance at Pembroke, he writes to Mr. Hickman from Lichfield, ‘<i>As I am yet unemployed</i>, I hope you will, if anything should offer, remember and recommend, Sir, your humble servant, Sam. Johnson.’</p>
		<p>In Boswell’s <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i> (Aug. 15, 1773) there is a very perplexing passage bearing on Johnson’s residence at College. ‘We talked of Whitefield. He said he was at the same college with him, and knew him before he began to be better than other people.’ Now Johnson, as Boswell tells us, read this journal in manuscript. The statement therefore seems to be well-established indeed. Yet Whitefield did not matriculate till Nov. 7, 1732, a full year after Johnson, according to Boswell, had left Oxford. We are told that, when Johnson was living at Birmingham, he borrowed Lobo’s <i>Abyssinia</i> from the library of Pembroke College. It is probable enough that a man who frequently walked from Lichfield to Birmingham and back would have trudged all the way to Oxford to fetch the book. In that case he might have seen Whitefield. But Thomas Warton says that ‘the first time of his being at Oxford after quitting the University was in 1754’ (<i>post</i>, under July 16, 1754).</p>
		<p>[238] ‘March 16, 1728⁠–⁠9. Yesterday in a Convocation Mr. Wm. Jorden of Pembroke Coll. was elected the Univ. of Oxford rector of Astocke in com. Wilts (which belongs to a Roman Catholic family).’ Hearne’s <i>Remains</i>, iii. 17. His fellowship was filled up on Dec. 23, 1730. Boswell’s statement therefore is inaccurate. If Johnson remained at college till Nov. 1731, he would have really been for at least ten months Adams’s pupil. We may assume that as his name remained on the books after Jorden left so he was <i>nominally</i> transferred to Adams. It is worthy of notice that Thomas Warton, in the account that he gives of Johnson’s visit to Oxford in 1754, says:⁠—‘He much regretted that his <i>first</i> tutor was dead.’</p>
		<p>[239] According to Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, pp. 17, 582 and <i>post</i>, Dec. 9, 1784) Johnson’s father was at one time a bankrupt. Johnson, in the epitaph that he wrote for him (<i>post</i>, Dec. 2, 1784) describes him as ‘bibliopola admodum peritus,’ but ‘rebus adversis diu conflictatus.’ He certainly did not die a bankrupt, as is shown by his leaving property to his widow and son, and also by the following MS. letter, that is preserved with two others of the same kind in Pembroke College.</p>
		<p>Ashby, April 19, 1736.</p>
		<p>Good Sr.,</p>
		<p>I must truble you again, my sister who desiurs her survis to you, &amp; begs you will be so good if you can to pravale with Mr. Wumsley to paye you the little money due to her you may have an opertunity to speak to him &amp; it will be a great truble for me to have a jerney for it when if he pleasd he might paye it you, it is a poore case she had but little left by Mr. Johnson but his books (not but he left her all he had) &amp; those sold at a poore reat, and be kept out of so small a sume by a gentleman so well able to paye, if you will doe yr best for the widow will be varey good in you, which will oblige yr reall freund JAMES BATE.</p>
		<p>To Mr. John Newton</p>
		<p>a Sider Seller at Litchfield.</p>
		<p>Pd. £5 to Mr. Newton.</p>
		<p>In another hand is written,</p>
		<p>To Gilbert Walmesley Esq.</p>
		<p>at Lichfield.</p>
		<p>And in a third hand,</p>
		<p>Pd. £5 to Mr. Newton.</p>
		<p>The exact amount claimed, as is Shewn by the letter, dated Jan. 31, 1735, was £5 6s. 4d. There is a yet earlier letter demanding payment of £5 6s. 4d. as ‘due to me’ for books, signed D. Johnson, dated Swarkstone, Aug. 21, 1733. It must be the same account. Perhaps D. Johnson was the executor. He writes from Ashby, where Michael Johnson had a branch business. But I know of no other mention of him or of James Bate. John Newton was the father of the Bishop of Bristol. <i>Post</i>, June 3,1784, and Bishop Newton’s <i>Works</i>, i. I.</p>
		<p>[240] Johnson, in a letter to Dr. Taylor, dated Aug. 18, 1763, advised him, in some trouble that he had with his wife, ‘to consult our old friend Mr. Howard. His profession has acquainted him with matrimonial law, and he is in himself a cool and wise man.’ <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S. v. 342. See <i>post</i>, March 20, 1778, for mention of his son.</p>
		<p>[241] See <i>post</i>, Dec. 1, 1743, note. Robert Levett, made famous by Johnson’s lines (<i>post</i>, Jan. 20, 1782), was not of this family.</p>
		<p>[242] Mr. Warton informs me, ‘that this early friend of Johnson was entered a Commoner of Trinity College, Oxford, aged seventeen, in 1698; and is the authour of many Latin verse translations in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. (vol. xv. 102). One of them is a translation of:</p>
		<p>‘My time, O ye Muses, was happily spent.’ <abbr>etc.</abbr></p>
		<p>He died Aug, 3, 1751, and a monument to his memory has been erected in the Cathedral of Lichfield, with an inscription written by Mr. Seward, one of the Prebendaries. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[243] Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 380.</p>
		<p>[244] See <i>post</i>, 1780, note at end of Mr. Langton’s ‘Collection.’</p>
		<p>[245] See <i>post</i>, 1743.</p>
		<p>[246] See <i>post</i> April 24, 1779.</p>
		<p>[247] Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 61) says that in August, 1738 (? 1739), Johnson went to Appleby, in Leicestershire, to apply for the mastership of Appleby School. This was after he and his wife had removed to London. It is likely that he visited Ashbourne.</p>
		<p>[248] ‘Old Meynell’ is mentioned, <i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton’s ‘Collection,’ as the author of ‘the observation, “For anything I see, foreigners are fools;” ’ and ‘Mr. Meynell,’ <i>post</i>, April 1, 1779, as saying that ‘The chief advantage of London is, that a man is always <i>so near his burrow</i>.’</p>
		<p>[249] See <i>post</i>, under March 16, 1759, note, and April 21, 1773. Mr. Alleyne Fitzherbert was created Lord St. Helens.</p>
		<p>[250] See <i>post</i>, 1780, end of Mr. Langton’s ‘Collection.’</p>
		<p>[251] Johnson, writing to Dr. Taylor on July 31, 1756, said, ‘I find myself very unwilling to take up a pen, only to tell my friends that I am well, and indeed I never did exchange letters regularly but with dear Miss Boothby.’ <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S. v. 304. At the end of the <i>Piozzi Letters</i> are given some of his letters to her. They were republished together with her letters to him in <i>An Account of the Life of Dr. Samuel Johnson</i>, 1805.</p>
		<p>[252] The words of Sir John Hawkins, P. 316. BOSWELL. ‘When Mr. Thrale once asked Johnson which had been the happiest period of his past life, he replied, “it was that year in which he spent one whole evening with Molly Aston. That, indeed,” said he, “was not happiness, it was rapture; but the thoughts of it sweetened the whole year.” I must add that the evening alluded to was not passed tête-à-tête, but in a select company of which the present Lord Kilmorey was one. “Molly,” says Dr. Johnson, “was a beauty and a scholar, and a wit and a whig; and she talked all in praise of liberty; and so I made this epigram upon her⁠—She was the loveliest creature I ever saw⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Liber ut esse velim suasisti<br/>
		 pulchra Maria;<br/>
		Ut maneam liber⁠—pulchra Maria<br/>
		 vale.’<br/></p>
		<p>‘Will it do this way in English, Sir,’ said I:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Persuasions to freedom fall oddly<br/>
		 from you;<br/>
		If freedom we seek⁠—fair Maria,<br/>
		 adieu!’<br/></p>
		<p>‘It will do well enough,’ replied he; ‘but it is translated by a lady, and the ladies never loved Molly Aston.’ ” Piozzi’s <i>Anec</i>., p. 157. See <i>post</i>, May 8, 1778.</p>
		<p>[253] Sir Thomas Aston, Bart., who died in January, 1724⁠–⁠5, left one son, named Thomas also, and eight daughters. Of the daughters, Catherine married Johnson’s friend, the Hon. Henry Hervey [_post, 1737]; Margaret, Gilbert Walmsley. Another of these ladies married the Rev. Mr. Gastrell [the man who cut down Shakspeare’s mulberry tree, <i>post</i>, March 25, 1776]; Mary, or <i>Molly</i> Aston, as she was usually called, became the wife of Captain Brodie of the navy. MALONE.</p>
		<p>[254] Luke vi. 35.</p>
		<p>[255] If this was in 1732 it was on the morrow of the day on which he received his share of his father’s property, <i>ante</i>, p. 80. A letter published in <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S. x. 421, shews that for a short time he was tutor to the son of Mr. Whitby of Heywood.</p>
		<p>[256] Bishop Hurd does not praise Blackwall, but the Rev. Mr. Budworth, headmaster of the grammar school at Brewood, who had himself been bred under Blackwall. MALONE. Mr. Nichols relates (<i>post</i>, Dec. 1784) that Johnson applied for the post of assistant to Mr. Budworth.</p>
		<p>[257] See <i>Gent. Mag</i>. Dec. 1784, p. 957. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[258] See <i>ante</i>, p. 78.</p>
		<p>[259] The patron’s manners were those of the neighbourhood. Hutton, writing of this town in 1770, says⁠—‘The inhabitants set their dogs at me merely because I was a stranger. Surrounded with impassable roads, no intercourse with man to humanize the mind, no commerce to smooth their rugged manners, they continue the boors of nature.’ <i>Life, of W. Hutton</i>, p. 45.</p>
		<p>[260] It appears from a letter of Johnson’s to a friend, dated Lichfield, July 27, 1732, that he had left Sir Wolstan Dixie’s house recently, before that letter was written. MALONE.</p>
		<p>[261] ‘The despicable wretchedness of teaching,’ wrote Carlyle, in his twenty-fourth year, when he was himself a teacher, ‘can be known only to those who have tried it, and to Him who made the heart and knows it all. One meets with few spectacles more afflicting than that of a young man with a free spirit, with impetuous though honourable feelings, condemned to waste the flower of his life in such a calling; to fade in it by slow and sure corrosion of discontent; and at last obscurely and unprofitably to leave, with an indignant joy, the miseries of a world which his talents might have illustrated and his virtues adorned. Such things have been and will be. But surely in that better life which good men dream of, the spirit of a Kepler or a Milton will find a more propitious destiny.’ Conway’s <i>Carlyle</i>, p. 176.</p>
		<p>[262] This newspaper was the <i>Birmingham Journal</i>. In the office of the <i>Birmingham Daily Post</i> is preserved the number (No. 28) for May 21, 1733. It is believed to be the only copy in existence. Warren is described by W. Hutton (<i>Life</i>, p. 77) as one of the ‘three eminent booksellers’ in Birmingham in 1750. ‘His house was “over against the Swan Tavern,” in High Street; doubtless in one of the old half-timbered houses pulled down in 1838 [1850].’ Timmins’s <i>Dr. Johnson in Birmingham</i>, p. 4.</p>
		<p>[263] ‘In the month of June 1733, I find him resident in the house of a person named Jarvis, at Birmingham.’ Hawkins, p. 21. His wife’s maiden name was Jarvis or Jervis.</p>
		<p>[264] In 1741, Hutton, a runaway apprentice, arrived at Birmingham. He says⁠—‘I had never seen more than five towns, Nottingham, Derby, Burton, Lichfield and Walsall. The outskirts of these were composed of wretched dwellings, visibly stamped with dirt and poverty. But the buildings in the exterior of Birmingham rose in a style of elegance. Thatch, so plentiful in other places, was not to be met with in this. The people possessed a vivacity I had never beheld. I had been among dreamers, but now I saw men awake. Their very step along the street showed alacrity. Every man seemed to know what he was about. The faces of other men seemed tinctured with an idle gloom; but here with a pleasing alertness. Their appearance was strongly marked with the modes of civil life.’ <i>Life of W. Hutton</i>, p. 41.</p>
		<p>[265] Hutton, in his account of the Birmingham riots of 1791, describing the destruction of a Mr. Taylor’s house, says⁠—‘The sons of plunder forgot that the prosperity of Birmingham was owing to a Dissenter, father to the man whose property they were destroying;’ ib. p. 181.</p>
		<p>[266] Johnson, it should seem, did not think himself ill-used by Warren; for writing to Hector on April 15, 1755, he says⁠—‘What news of poor Warren? I have not lost all my kindness for him.’ <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S. iii. 301.</p>
		<p>[267] That it is by no means an exact translation Johnson’s <i>Preface</i> shows. He says that in the dissertations alone an exact translation has been attempted. The rest of the work he describes as an epitome.</p>
		<p>[268] In the original, <i>Segued</i>.</p>
		<p>[269] In the original, <i>Zeila</i>.</p>
		<p>[270] Lobo, in describing a waterfall on the Nile, had said:⁠—‘The fall of this mighty stream from so great a height makes a noise that may be heard to a considerable distance; but I could not observe that the neighbouring inhabitants were at all deaf. I conversed with several, and was as easily heard by them as I heard them,’ p. 101.</p>
		<p>[271] In the original, <i>without religion, polity, or articulate language</i>.</p>
		<p>[272] See <i>Rambler</i>, No. 103. BOSWELL. Johnson in other passages insisted on the high value of curiosity. In this same <i>Rambler</i> he says:⁠—‘Curiosity is one of the permanent and certain characteristics of a vigorous intellect.’ In the allegory in <i>Rambler</i>, No. 105, he calls curiosity his ‘long-loved protectress,’ who is known by truth ‘among the most faithful of her followers.’ In No. 150 he writes:⁠—‘Curiosity is in great and generous minds the first passion and the last; and perhaps always predominates in proportion to the strength of the contemplative faculties.’ In No. 5 he assert that ‘he that enlarges his curiosity after the works of nature demonstrably multiplies the inlets to happiness.’</p>
		<p>[273] Rasselas, <i>post</i>, 1759.</p>
		<p>[274] Hawkins (p. 163) gives the following extract from Johnson’s <i>Annales</i>:⁠—‘Friday, August 27 (1734), 10 at night. This day I have trifled away, except that I have attended the school in the morning, I read to-night in Roger’s sermoms. To-night I began the breakfast law (sic) anew.’</p>
		<p>[275] May we not trace a fanciful similarity between Politian and Johnson? Huetius, speaking of Paulus Pelissonius Fontanerius, says, ‘… in quo Natura, ut olim in Angelo Politiano, deformitarem oris excellentis ingenii præstantia compensavit.’ <i>Comment, de reb. ad eum pertin</i>. Edit. Amstel. 1718, p. 200. BOSWELL. In Paulus Pelissonius Fontanerius we have difficulty in detecting Mme. de Sévigné’s friend, Pelisson, of whom M. de Guilleragues used the phrase, ‘qu’il abusait de la permission qu’ont les hommes d’être laids.’ See <i>Mme. de Sévigné’s Letter</i>, 5 Jan., 1674. CROKER.</p>
		<p>[276] The book was to contain more than thirty sheets, the price to be two shillings and sixpence at the time of subscribing, and two shillings and sixpence at the delivery of a perfect book in quires. BOSWELL. ‘Among the books in his library, at the time of his decease, I found a very old and curious edition of the works of Politian, which appeared to belong to Pembroke College, Oxford.’ HAWKINS, p. 445. See <i>post</i>, Nov., 1784. In his last work he shews his fondness for modern Latin poetry. He says:⁠—‘Pope had sought for images and sentiments in a region not known to have been explored by many other of the English writers; he had consulted the modern writers of Latin poetry, a class of authors whom Boileau endeavoured to bring into contempt, and who are too generally neglected.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 299.</p>
		<p>[277] A writer in <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 1st S. xii. 266, says ‘that he has a letter written by Nathanael, in which he makes mention of his brother “scarcely using him with common civility,” and says, “I believe I shall go to Georgia in about a fortnight!” ’ Nathanael died in Lichfield in 1737; see <i>post</i>, Dec. 2, 1784, for his epitaph. Among the MSS. in Pembroke College Library are bills for books receipted by Nath. Johnson and by Sarah Johnson (his mother). She writes like a person of little education.</p>
		<p>[278] Miss Cave, the grand-niece of Mr. Edward Cave, has obligingly shewn me the originals of this and the other letters of Dr. Johnson, to him, which were first published in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. [lv. 3], with notes by Mr. John Nichols, the worthy and indefatigable editor of that valuable miscellany, signed N.; some of which I shall occasionally transcribe in the course of this work. BOSWELL. I was able to examine some of these letters while they were still in the possession of one of Cave’s collateral descendants, and I have in one or two places corrected errors of transcription.</p>
		<p>[279] Sir John Floyer’s Treatise on Cold Baths. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. 1734, p. 197. BOSWELL. This letter shews how uncommon a thing a cold bath was. Floyer, after recommending ‘a general method of bleeding and purging’ before the patient uses cold bathing, continues, ‘I have commonly cured the rickets by dipping children of a year old in the bath every morning; and this wonderful effect has encouraged me to dip four boys at Lichfield in the font at their baptism, and none have suffered any inconvenience by it.’ (For mention of Floyer, see <i>ante</i>, p. 42, and <i>post</i>, March 27 and July 20, 1784.) Locke, in his <i>Treatise on Education</i>, had recommended cold bathing for children. Johnson, in his review of Lucas’s <i>Essay on Waters</i> (<i>post</i>, 1756), thus attacks cold bathing:⁠—‘It is incident to physicians, I am afraid, beyond all other men, to mistake subsequence for consequence. “The old gentleman,” says Dr. Lucas, “that uses the cold bath, enjoys in return an uninterrupted state of health.” This instance does not prove that the cold bath produces health, but only that it will not always destroy it. He is well with the bath, he would have been well without it.’ <i>Literary Magazine</i>, p. 229.</p>
		<p>[280] A prize of fifty pounds for the best poem on ‘Life, Death, Judgement, Heaven, and Hell.’ See <i>Gent. Mag</i>. vol. iv. p. 560. N. BOSWELL. ‘Cave sometimes offered subjects for poems, and proposed prizes for the best performers. The first prize was fifty pounds, for which, being but newly acquainted with wealth, and thinking the influence of fifty pounds extremely great, he expected the first authors of the kingdom to appear as competitors; and offered the allotment of the prize to the universities. But when the time came, no name was seen among the writers that had ever been seen before; the universities and several private men rejected the province of assigning the prize.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 432.</p>
		<p>[281] I suspect that Johnson wrote ‘the Castle <i>Inn</i>, Birmingham.’</p>
		<p>[282] Mrs. Piozzi gives the following account of this little composition from Dr. Johnson’s own relation to her, on her inquiring whether it was rightly attributed to him:⁠—‘I think it is now just forty years ago, that a young fellow had a sprig of myrtle given him by a girl he courted, and asked me to write him some verses that he might present her in return. I promised, but forgot; and when he called for his lines at the time agreed on⁠—Sit still a moment, (says I) dear Mund’ [see <i>post</i>, May 7, 1773, for Johnson’s ‘way of contracting the names of his friends’], ‘and I’ll fetch them thee⁠—So stepped aside for five minutes, and wrote the nonsense you now keep such a stir about.’ <i>Anec</i>. p. 34.</p>
		<p>In my first edition I was induced to doubt the authenticity of this account, by the following circumstantial statement in a letter to me from Miss Seward, of Lichfield:⁠—’<i>I know</i> those verses were addressed to Lucy Porter, when he was enamoured of her in his boyish days, two or three years before he had seen her mother, his future wife. He wrote them at my grandfather’s, and gave them to Lucy in the presence of my mother, to whom he showed them on the instant. She used to repeat them to me, when I asked her for <i>the Verses Dr. Johnson gave her on a Sprig of Myrtle, which he had stolen or begged from her bosom</i>. We all know honest Lucy Porter to have been incapable of the mean vanity of applying to herself a compliment not <i>intended</i> for her.’ Such was this lady’s statement, which I make no doubt she supposed to be correct; but it shews how dangerous it is to trust too implicitly to traditional testimony and ingenious inference; for Mr. Hector has lately assured me that Mrs. Piozzi’s account is in this instance accurate, and that he was the person for whom Johnson wrote those verses, which have been erroneously ascribed to Mr. Hammond.</p>
		<p>I am obliged in so many instances to notice Mrs. Piozzi’s incorrectness of relation, that I gladly seize this opportunity of acknowledging, that however often, she is not always inaccurate.</p>
		<p>The author having been drawn into a controversy with Miss Anna Seward, in consequence of the preceding statement, (which may be found in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. vol. liii. and liv.) received the following letter from Mr. Edmund Hector, on the subject:</p>
		<h5>‘DEAR SIR,</h5>
		<p>‘I am sorry to see you are engaged in altercation with a Lady, who seems unwilling to be convinced of her errors. Surely it would be more ingenuous to acknowledge, than to persevere.</p>
		<p>‘Lately, in looking over some papers I meant to burn, I found the original manuscript of the <i>Myrtle</i>, with the date on it, 1731, which I have inclosed.</p>
		<p>‘The true history (which I could swear to) is as follows: Mr. Morgan Graves, the elder brother of a worthy Clergyman near Bath, with whom I was acquainted, waited upon a lady in this neighbourhood, who at parting presented him the branch. He shewed it me, and wished much to return the compliment in verse. I applied to Johnson, who was with me, and in about half an hour dictated the verses which I sent to my friend.</p>
		<p>‘I most solemnly declare, at that time Johnson was an entire stranger to the Porter family; and it was almost two years after that I introduced him to the acquaintance of Porter, whom I bought my cloaths of.</p>
		<p>‘If you intend to convince this obstinate woman, and to exhibit to the publick the truth of your narrative, you are at liberty to make what use you please of this statement.</p>
		<p>‘I hope you will pardon me for taking up so much of your time. Wishing you <i>multos et felices annos</i>, I shall subscribe myself,</p>
		<p>‘Your obliged humble servant,</p>
		<h5>’E. HECTOR.’</h5>
		<p><i>Birmingham</i>, Jan. 9th, 1794.</p>
		<p>BOSWELL. For a further account of Boswell’s controversy with Miss<br/>
		Seward, see <i>post</i>, June 25, 1784.<br/></p>
		<p>[283] See <i>post</i>, beginning of 1744, April 28, 1783, and under Dec. 2, 1784.</p>
		<p>[284] See <i>post</i>, near end of 1762, note.</p>
		<p>[285] In the registry of St. Martin’s Church, Birmingham, are the following entries:⁠—‘Baptisms, Nov. 8, 1715, Lucy, daughter of Henry Porter. Jan. 29, 1717 [O. S.], Jarvis Henry, son of Henry Porter. Burials, Aug. 3, 1734, Henry Porter of Edgbaston.’ There were two sons; one, Captain Porter, who died in 1763 (Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, p. 130), the other who died in 1783 (<i>post</i>, Nov. 29, 1783).</p>
		<p>[286] According to Malone, Reynolds said that ‘he had paid attention to Johnson’s limbs; and far from being unsightly, he deemed them well formed.’ Prior’s <i>Malone</i>, p. 175. Mrs. Piozzi says:⁠—‘His stature was remarkably high, and his limbs exceedingly large; his features were strongly marked, and his countenance particularly rugged; though the original complexion had certainly been fair, a circumstance somewhat unusual; his sight was near, and otherwise imperfect; yet his eyes, though of a light-grey colour, were so wild, so piercing, and at times so fierce, that fear was, I believe, the first emotion in the hearts of all his beholders.’ Piozzi’s <i>Anec</i>. p. 297. See <i>post</i>, end of the book, and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, near the beginning.</p>
		<p>[287] If Johnson wore his own hair at Oxford, it must have exposed him to ridicule. Graves, the author of <i>The Spiritual Quixote</i>, tells us that Shenstone had the courage to wear his own hair, though ‘it often exposed him to the ill-natured remarks of people who had not half his sense. After I was elected at All Souls, where there was often a party of loungers in the gateway, on my expostulating with Mr. Shenstone for not visiting me so often as usual, he said, “he was ashamed to face his enemies in the gate.” ’</p>
		<p>[288] See <i>post</i>, 1739.</p>
		<p>[289] Mrs. Johnson was born on Feb. 4, 1688⁠–⁠9. MALONE. She was married on July 9, 1735, in St. Werburgh’s Church, Derby, as is shewn by the following copy of the marriage register: ’1735, July 9, Mar’d Sam’ll Johnson of ye parish of St. Mary’s in Litchfield, and Eliz’th Porter of ye parish of St. Phillip in Burmingham.’ <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 4th S. vi. 44. At the time of their marriage, therefore, she was forty-six, and Johnson only two months short of twenty-six.</p>
		<p>[290] The author of the <i>Memoirs of the Life and Writings of Dr. Johnson</i>, 1785, p. 25, says:⁠—‘Mrs. Porter’s husband died insolvent, but her settlement was secured. She brought her second husband about seven or eight hundred pounds, a great part of which was expended in fitting up a house for a boarding-school.’ That she had some money can be almost inferred from what we are told by Boswell and Hawkins. How other-wise was Johnson able to hire and furnish a large house for his school? Boswell says that he had but three pupils. Hawkins gives him a few more. ‘His number,’ he writes (p. 36) ‘at no time exceeded eight, and of those not all were boarders.’ After nearly twenty months of married life, when he went to London, ‘he had,’ Boswell says, ‘a little money.’ It was not till a year later still that he began to write for the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. If Mrs. Johnson had not money, how did she and her husband live from July 1735 to the spring of 1738? It could scarcely have been on the profits made from their school. Inference, however, is no longer needful, as there is positive evidence. Mr. Timmins in his <i>Dr. Johnson in Birmingham</i> (p. 4) writes:⁠—‘My friend, Mr. Joseph Hill, says, A copy of an old deed which has recently come into my hands, shews that a hundred pounds of Mrs. Johnson’s fortune was left in the hands of a Birmingham attorney named Thomas Perks, who died insolvent; and in 1745, a bulky deed gave his creditors 7_s_. 4_d_. in the pound. Among the creditors for £100 were “Samuel Johnson, gent., and Elizabeth his wife, executors of the last will and testament of Harry Porter, late of Birmingham aforesaid, woollen draper, deceased.” Johnson and his wife were almost the only creditors who did not sign the deed, their seals being left void. It is doubtful, therefore, whether they ever obtained the amount of the composition £36 13_s_. 4_d_.’</p>
		<p>[291] Sir Walter Scott has recorded Lord Auchinleck’s ‘sneer of most sovereign contempt,’ while he described Johnson as ‘a dominie, monan auld dominie; he keeped a schule, and cau’d it an acaadamy.’ Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, p. 397, note.</p>
		<p>[292] ‘Edial is two miles west of Lichfield.’ Harwood’s <i>Lichfield</i>, p. 564.</p>
		<p>[293] Johnson in more than one passage in his writings seems to have in mind his own days as a schoolmaster. Thus in the <i>Life of Milton</i> he says:⁠—‘This is the period of his life from which all his biographers seem inclined to shrink. They are unwilling that Milton should be degraded to a schoolmaster; but, since it cannot be denied that he taught boys, one finds out that he taught for nothing, and another that his motive was only zeal for the propagation of learning and virtue; and all tell what they do not know to be true, only to excuse an act which no wise man will consider as in itself disgraceful. His father was alive; his allowance was not ample; and he supplied its deficiencies by an honest and useful employment.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 75. In the <i>Life of Blackmore</i> he says:⁠—‘In some part of his life, it is not known when, his indigence compelled him to teach a school, an humiliation with which, though it certainly lasted but a little while, his enemies did not forget to reproach him, when he became conspicuous enough to excite malevolence; and let it be remembered for his honour, that to have been once a school-master is the only reproach which all the perspicacity of malice, animated by wit, has ever fixed upon his private life.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 36.</p>
		<p>[294] In the original <i>To teach. Seasons, Spring</i>, l. 1149, Thomson is speaking, not of masters, but of parents.</p>
		<p>[295] In the <i>Life of Milton</i>, Johnson records his own experience. ‘Every man that has ever undertaken to instruct others can tell what slow advances he has been able to make, and how much patience it requires to recall vagrant inattention, to stimulate sluggish indifference, and to rectify absurd misapprehension.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 76.</p>
		<p>[296]</p>
		<p>‘As masters fondly soothe their boys to read With cakes and sweetmeats.’</p>
		<p><i>Francis</i>, Hor. i. <i>Sat</i>. I. 25.</p>
		<p>[297] As Johnson kept Garrick much in awe when present, David, when his back was turned, repaid the restraint with ridicule of him and his dulcinea, which should be read with great abatement. PERCY. He was not consistent in his account, for ‘he told Mrs. Thrale that she was a <i>little painted puppet</i> of no value at all.’ ‘He made out,’ Mrs. Piozzi continues, ‘some comical scenes, by mimicking her in a dialogue he pretended to have overheard. I do not know whether he meant such stuff to be believed or no, it was so comical. The picture I found of her at Lichfield was very pretty, and her daughter said it was like. Mr. Johnson has told me that her hair was eminently beautiful, quite <i>blonde</i> like that of a baby.’ Piozzi’s <i>Anec</i>. p. 148.</p>
		<p>[298] Mr. Croker points out that in this paper ‘there are two separate schemes, the first for a school⁠—the second for the individual studies of some young friend.’</p>
		<p>[299] In the <i>Rambler</i>, No. 122, Johnson, after stating that ‘it is observed that our nation has been hitherto remarkably barren of historical genius,’ praises Knolles, who, he says, ‘in his <i>History of the Turks</i>, has displayed all the excellencies that narration can admit.’</p>
		<p>[300] Both of them used to talk pleasantly of this their first journey to London. Garrick, evidently meaning to embellish a little, said one day in my hearing, ‘we rode and tied.’ And the Bishop of Killaloe informed me, that at another time, when Johnson and Garrick were dining together in a pretty large company, Johnson humorously ascertaining the chronology of something, expressed himself thus: ‘that was the year when I came to London with two-pence half-penny in my pocket.’ Garrick overhearing him, exclaimed, ‘eh? what do you say? with two-pence half-penny in your pocket?’⁠—JOHNSON, ‘Why yes; when I came with two-pence half-penny in <i>my</i> pocket, and thou, Davy, with three half-pence in thine.’ BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[301] See <i>Gent. Mag</i>., xxiv. 333.</p>
		<p>[302] Mr. Colson was First Master of the Free School at Rochester. In 1739 he was appointed Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge. MALONE. Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 49) says that ‘by Gelidus the philosopher (<i>Rambler</i>, No. 24), Johnson meant to represent Colson.’</p>
		<p>[303] This letter is printed in the <i>Garrick Corres</i>. i. 2. There we read <i>I doubt not</i>.</p>
		<p>[304] One curious anecdote was communicated by himself to Mr. John Nichols. Mr. Wilcox, the bookseller, on being informed by him that his intention was to get his livelihood as an authour, eyed his robust frame attentively, and with a significant look, said, ‘You had better buy a porter’s knot.’ He however added, ‘Wilcox was one of my best friends.’ BOSWELL. Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 43) states that Johnson and Garrick had soon exhausted their small stock of money in London, and that on Garrick’s suggestion they applied for a loan to Wilcox, of whom he had a slight knowledge. ‘Representing themselves to him, as they really were, two young men, friends and travellers from the same place, and just arrived with a view to settle here, he was so moved with their artless tale, that on their joint note he advanced them all that their modesty would permit them to ask (five pounds), which was soon after punctually repaid.’ Perhaps Johnson was thinking of himself when he recorded the advice given by Cibber to Fenton, ‘When the tragedy of Mariamne was shewn to Cibber, it was rejected by him, with the additional insolence of advising Fenton to engage himself in some employment of honest labour, by which he might obtain that support which he could never hope from his poetry. The play was acted at the other theatre; and the brutal petulance of Cibber was confuted, though perhaps not shamed, by general applause.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 56. Adam Smith in the <i>Wealth of Nations</i> (Book i. ch. 2) says that ‘the difference between the most dissimilar characters, between a philosopher and a common street-porter, for example, seems to arise not so much from nature, as from habit, custom, and education.’ Wilcox’s shop was in Little Britain. Benjamin Franklin, in 1725, lodged next door to him. ‘He had,’ says Franklin (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 64), ‘an immense collection of second-hand books. Circulating libraries were not then in use; but we agreed that on certain reasonable terms I might read any of his books.’</p>
		<p>[305] Bernard Lintot (<i>post</i>, July 19, 1763) died Feb. 3, 1736. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. vi. 110. This, no doubt, was his son.</p>
		<p>[306] Dr. A. Carlyle (<i>Auto</i>. p. 195) says that being in London in 1746 he dined frequently with a club of officers, where they had an excellent dinner at ten-pence. From what he adds it is clear that the tavern-keeper made his profit on the wine. At Edinburgh, four years earlier, he and his fellow-students used to get ‘at four-pence a-head a very good dinner of broth and beef, and a roast and potatoes every day, with fish three or four times a-week, and all the small beer that was called for till the cloth was removed’ (<i>ib</i>. p. 63). W. Hutton, who in 1750 opened a very small book-shop in Birmingham, for which he paid rent at a shilling a week, says (<i>Life of Hutton</i>, p. 84): ‘Five shillings a week covered every expense; as food, rent, washing, lodging, <abbr>etc.</abbr>’ He knew how to live wretchedly.</p>
		<p>[307] On April 17, 1778, Johnson said: ‘Early in life I drank wine; for many years I drank none. I then for some years drank a great deal. I then had a severe illness, and left it off, and I have never begun it again.’ Somewhat the same account is given in Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 16, 1773. Roughly speaking, he seems to have been an abstainer from about 1736 to at least as late as 1757, and from about 1765 to the end of his life. In 1751 Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 286) describes him as drinking only lemonade ‘in a whole night spent in festivity’ at the Ivy Lane Club. In 1757 he described himself ‘as a hardened and shameless tea-drinker, who has for twenty years diluted his meals with only tea’ (Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 21). It was, I believe, in his visit to Oxford in 1759 that ‘University College witnessed his drinking three bottles of port without being the worse for it’ (<i>post</i>, April 7, 1778). When he was living in the Temple (between 1760⁠–⁠65) he had the frisk with Langton and Beauclerk when they made a bowl of <i>Bishop</i> (<i>post</i>, 1753). On his birthday in 1760, he ‘resolved to drink less strong liquors’ (<i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 42). In 1762 on his visit to Devonshire he drank three bottles of wine after supper. This was the only time Reynolds had seen him intoxicated. (Northcote’s <i>Reynolds</i>, ii. 161). In 1763 he affected Boswell’s nerves by keeping him up late to drink port with him (<i>post</i>, July 14, 1763). On April 21, 1764, he records: ‘From the beginning of this year I have in some measure forborne excess of strong drink’ (<i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 51). On Easter Sunday he records: ‘Avoided wine’ (<i>id</i>. p. 55). On March 1, 1765, he is described at Cambridge as ‘giving Mrs. Macaulay for his toast, and drinking her in two bumpers.’ It was about this time that he had the severe illness (<i>post</i>, under Oct. 17, 1765, note). In Feb. 1766, Boswell found him no longer drinking wine. He shortly returned to it again; for on Aug. 2, 1767, he records, ‘I have for some days forborne wine;’ and on Aug. 17, ‘By abstinence from wine and suppers I obtained sudden and great relief’ (<i>Pr. and Med</i>. pp. 73, 4). According to Hawkins, Johnson said:⁠—‘After a ten years’ forbearance of every fluid except tea and sherbet, I drank one glass of wine to the health of Sir Joshua Reynolds on the evening of the day on which he was knighted’ (Hawkins’s <i>Johnson’s Works</i> (1787), xi. 215). As Reynolds was knighted on April 21, 1769 (Taylor’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 321), Hawkins’s report is grossly inaccurate. In Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 16, 1773, and <i>post</i>, March 16, 1776, we find him abstaining. In 1778 he persuaded Boswell to be ‘a water-drinker upon trial’ (<i>post</i>, April 28, 1778). On April 7, 1779, ‘he was persuaded to drink one glass of claret that he might judge of it, not from recollection.’ On March 20, 1781, Boswell found that Johnson had lately returned to wine. ‘I drink it now sometimes,’ he said, ‘but not socially.’ He seems to have generally abstained however. On April 20, 1781, he would not join in drinking Lichfield ale. On March 17, 1782, he made some punch for himself, by which in the night he thought ‘both his breast and imagination disordered’ (<i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 205). In the spring of this year Hannah More urged him to take a little wine. ‘I can’t drink a <i>little</i>, child,’ he answered; ‘therefore I never touch it’ (H. More’s <i>Memoirs</i>, i. 251). On July 1, 1784, Beattie, who met him at dinner, says, ‘he cannot be prevailed on to drink wine’ (Beattie’s <i>Life</i>, p. 316). On his death-bed he refused any ‘inebriating sustenance’ (<i>post</i>, Dec. 1784). It is remarkable that writing to Dr. Taylor on Aug. 5, 1773, he said:⁠—‘Drink a great deal, and sleep heartily;’ and that on June 23, 1776, he again wrote to him:⁠—‘I hope you presever in drinking. My opinion is that I have drunk too little, and therefore have the gout, for it is of my own acquisition, as neither my father had it nor my mother’ (<i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S. v. pp. 422, 3). On Sept. 19, 1777 (<i>post</i>), he even ‘owned that in his opinion a free use of wine did not shorten life.’ Johnson disapproved of fermented liquors only in the case of those who, like himself and Boswell, could not keep from excess.</p>
		<p>[308] Ofellus, or rather Ofella, is the ‘rusticus, abnormis sapiens, crassaque Minerva’ of Horace’s <i>Satire</i>, ii. 2. 3. What he teaches is briefly expressed in Pope’s Imitation, ii. 2. 1:</p>
		<p>‘What, and how great, the virtue and the art<br/>
		To live on little with a cheerful heart<br/>
		(A doctrine sage, but truly none of mine);<br/>
		Let’s talk, my friends, but talk before we dine.’<br/></p>
		<p>In 1769 was published a worthless poem called <i>The Art of Living in London</i>; in which ‘instructions were given to persons who live in a garret, and spend their evenings in an ale-house.’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxxix. 45. To this Boswell refers.</p>
		<p>[309] ‘Johnson this day, when we were by ourselves, observed how common it was for people to talk from books; to retail the sentiments of others, and not their own; in short, to converse without any originality of thinking. He was pleased to say, “You and I do not talk from books.” ’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Nov. 3, 1773.</p>
		<p>[310] The passage to Ireland was commonly made from Chester.</p>
		<p>[311] The honourable Henry Hervey, third son of the first Earl of Bristol, quitted the army and took orders. He married a sister of Sir Thomas Aston, by whom he got the Aston Estate, and assumed the name and arms of that family. Vide Collins’s <i>Peerage</i>. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[312] The following brief mention of Greenwich Park in 1750 is found in one of Miss Talbot’s Letters. ‘Then when I come to talk of Greenwich⁠—Did you ever see it? It was quite a new world to me, and a very charming one. Only on the top of a most inaccessible hill in the park, just as we were arrived at a view that we had long been aiming at, a violent clap of thunder burst over our heads.’⁠—<i>Carter and Talbot Corres</i>, i. 345.</p>
		<p>[313] At the Oxford Commemoration of 1733 Courayer returned thanks in his robes to the University for the honour it had done him two years before in presenting him with his degree. <i>Dr. Johnson: His Friends and his Critics</i>, p. 94.</p>
		<p>[314] This library was given by George IV to the British Museum. CROKER.</p>
		<p>[315] Ovid, Meta. iii. 724.</p>
		<p>[316] Act iii. sc. 8.</p>
		<p>[317] Act i. sc. 1.</p>
		<p>[318] Act ii. sc. 7.</p>
		<p>[319] <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>, 3rd edit. p. 232 [Sept. 20, 1773]. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[320] Johnson’s letter to her of Feb. 6, 1759, shows that she was, at that time, living in his house at Lichfield. Miss Seward (<i>Letters</i>, i. 116) says that ‘she boarded in Lichfield with his mother.’ Some passages in other of his letters (Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, pp. 144, 145, 173) lead me to think that she stayed on in this house till 1766, when she had built herself a house with money left her by her brother.</p>
		<p>[321] See <i>post</i>, Oct. 10, 1779.</p>
		<p>[322] He could scarcely have solicited a worse manager. Horace Walpole writing in 1744 (<i>Letters</i>, i. 332) says: ‘The town has been trying all this winter to beat pantomimes off the stage very boisterously. Fleetwood, the master of Drury-Lane, has omitted nothing to support them as they supported his house. About ten days ago, he let into the pit great numbers of Bear-garden <i>bruisers</i> (that is the term) to knock down everybody that hissed. The pit rallied their forces and drove them out.’</p>
		<p>[323] It was not till volume v. that Cave’s name was given on the title-page. In volumes viii. and ix., and volumes xii. to xvii. the name is Edward Cave, Jun. Cave in his examination before the House of Lords on April 30, 1747, said:⁠—‘That he was concerned in the <i>Gentleman’s Magazine</i> at first with his nephew; and since the death of his nephew he has done it entirely himself.’ <i>Parl. Hist</i>. xiv. 59.</p>
		<p>[324] Its sale, according to Johnson, was ten thousand copies. <i>Post</i>, April 25, 1778. So popular was it that before it had completed its ninth year the fifth edition of some of the earliest numbers was printed. Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 349. In the <i>Life of Cave</i> Johnson describes it as ‘a periodical pamphlet, of which the scheme is known wherever the English language is spoken.’ <i>Ib</i>. vi. 431.</p>
		<p>[325] Yet the early numbers contained verses as grossly indecent as they were dull. Cave moreover advertised indecent books for sale at St. John’s Gate, and in one instance, at least, the advertisement was in very gross language.</p>
		<p>[326] See <i>post</i>, April 25, 1778.</p>
		<p>[327] While in the course of my narrative I enumerate his writings, I shall take care that my readers shall not be left to waver in doubt, between certainty and conjecture, with regard to their authenticity; and, for that purpose, shall mark with an <i>asterisk</i> (*) those which he acknowledged to his friends, and with a <i>dagger</i> (dagger) those which are ascertained to be his by internal evidence. When any other pieces are ascribed to him, I shall give my reasons. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[328] Hawkins says that ‘Cave had few of those qualities that constitute the character of urbanity. Upon the first approach of a stranger his practice was to continue sitting, and for a few minutes to continue silent. If at any time he was inclined to begin the discourse, it was generally by putting a leaf of the <i>Magazine</i> then in the press into the hand of his visitor and asking his opinion of it. He was so incompetent a judge of Johnson’s abilities that, meaning at one time to dazzle him with the splendour of some of those luminaries in literature who favoured him with their correspondence, he told him that, if he would in the evening be at a certain alehouse in the neighbourhood of Clerkenwell, he might have a chance of seeing Mr. Browne and another or two of the persons mentioned in the preceding note. [The note contained the names of some of Cave’s regular writers.] Johnson accepted the invitation; and being introduced by Cave, dressed in a loose horseman’s coat, and such a great bushy uncombed wig as he constantly wore, to the sight of Mr. Browne, whom he found sitting at the upper end of a long table, in a cloud of tobacco-smoke, had his curiosity gratified.’ [Mr. Carlyle writes of ‘bushy-wigged Cave;’ but it was Johnson whose wig is described, and not Cave’s. On p. 327 Hawkins again mentions his ‘great bushy wig,’ and says that ‘it was ever nearly as impenetrable by a comb as a quickset hedge.’] Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, pp. 45⁠–⁠50. Johnson, after mentioning Cave’s slowness, says: ‘The same chillness of mind was observable in his conversation; he was watching the minutest accent of those whom he disgusted by seeming inattention; and his visitant was surprised, when he came a second time, by preparations to execute the scheme which he supposed never to have been heard.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 434.</p>
		<p>[329] ‘The first lines put one in mind of Casimir’s Ode to Pope Urban:⁠—</p>
		<p>“Urbane, regum maxime, maxime<br/>
		 Urbane vatum.”<br/></p>
		<p>The Polish poet was probably at that time in the hands of a man who had meditated the history of the Latin poets.’ Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 42.</p>
		<p>[330] Cave had been grossly attacked by rival booksellers; see <i>Gent. Mag</i>., viii. 156. Hawkins says (<i>Life</i>, p. 92), ‘With that sagacity which we frequently observe, but wonder at, in men of slow parts, he seemed to anticipate the advice contained in Johnson’s ode, and forbore a reply, though not his revenge.’ This he gratified by reprinting in his own Magazine one of the most scurrilous and foolish attacks.</p>
		<p>[331] A translation of this Ode, by an unknown correspondent, appeared in the <i>Magazine</i> for the month of May following:</p>
		<p>‘Hail, URBAN! indefatigable man,<br/>
		Unwearied yet by all thy useful toil!<br/>
		 Whom num’rous slanderers assault in vain;<br/>
		Whom no base calumny can put to foil.<br/>
		 But still the laurel on thy learned brow<br/>
		 Flourishes fair, and shall for ever grow.<br/></p>
		<p>‘What mean the servile imitating crew,<br/>
		What their vain blust’ring, and their empty noise,<br/>
		 Ne’er seek: but still thy noble ends pursue,<br/>
		Unconquer’d by the rabble’s venal voice.<br/>
		 Still to the Muse thy studious mind apply,<br/>
		 Happy in temper as in industry.<br/></p>
		<p>‘The senseless sneerings of an haughty tongue,<br/>
		Unworthy thy attention to engage,<br/>
		 Unheeded pass: and tho’ they mean thee wrong,<br/>
		By manly silence disappoint their rage.<br/>
		 Assiduous diligence confounds its foes,<br/>
		 Resistless, tho’ malicious crouds oppose.<br/></p>
		<p>‘Exert thy powers, nor slacken in the course,<br/>
		Thy spotless fame shall quash all false reports:<br/>
		 Exert thy powers, nor fear a rival’s force,<br/>
		But thou shalt smile at all his vain efforts;<br/>
		 Thy labours shall be crown’d with large success;<br/>
		 The Muse’s aid thy Magazine shall bless.<br/></p>
		<p>‘No page more grateful to th’ harmonious nine<br/>
		Than that wherein thy labours we survey;<br/>
		 Where solemn themes in fuller splendour shine,<br/>
		(Delightful mixture,) blended with the gay,<br/>
		 Where in improving, various joys we find,<br/>
		 A welcome respite to the wearied mind.<br/></p>
		<p>‘Thus when the nymphs in some fair verdant mead,<br/>
		Of various flowr’s a beauteous wreath compose,<br/>
		 The lovely violet’s azure-painted head<br/>
		Adds lustre to the crimson-blushing rose.<br/>
		 Thus splendid Iris, with her varied dye,<br/>
		 Shines in the aether, and adorns the sky. BRITON.’<br/></p>
		<h5>BOSWELL.</h5>
		<p>[332] ‘I have some reason to think that at his first coming to town he frequented Slaughter’s coffee-house with a view to acquire a habit of speaking French, but he never could attain to it. Lockman used the same method and succeeded, as Johnson himself once told me.’ Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 516. Lockman is <i>l’ilustre Lockman</i> mentioned <i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton’s <i>Collection</i>. It was at ‘Old Slaughter’s Coffee-house, when a number of foreigners were talking loud about little matters, that Johnson one evening said, “Does not this confirm old Meynell’s observation, <i>For anything I see, foreigners are fools</i>“?’ <i>post</i>, ib.</p>
		<p>[333] He had read Petrarch ‘when but a boy;’ <i>ante</i>, p. 57.</p>
		<p>[334] Horace Walpole, writing of the year 1770, about libels, says: ‘Their excess was shocking, and in nothing more condemnable than in the dangers they brought on the liberty of the press.’ This evil was chiefly due to ‘the spirit of the Court, which aimed at despotism, and the daring attempts of Lord Mansfield to stifle the liberty of the press. His innovations had given such an alarm that scarce a jury would find the rankest satire libellous.’ <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George III</i>, iv. 167. Smollett in <i>Humphrey Clinker</i> (published in 1771) makes Mr. Bramble write, in his letter of June 2: ‘The public papers are become the infamous vehicles of the most cruel and perfidious defamation; every rancorous knave⁠—every desperate incendiary, that can afford to spend half-a-crown or three shillings, may skulk behind the press of a newsmonger, and have a stab at the first character in the kingdom, without running the least hazard of detection or punishment.’ The scribblers who had of late shewn their petulance were not always obscure. Such scurrilous but humorous pieces as <i>Probationary Odes for the Laureateship</i>, <i>The Rolliad</i>, and <i>Royal Recollections</i>, which were all published while Boswell was writing <i>The Life of Johnson</i>, were written, there can be little doubt, by men of position. In the first of the three (p. 27) Boswell is ridiculed. He is made to say:⁠—‘I know Mulgrave is a bit of a poet as well as myself; for I dined in company once where he dined that very day twelve-month.’ This evil of libelling had extended to America. Benjamin Franklin (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 148), writing in 1784, says that ‘libelling and personal abuse have of late years become so disgraceful to our country. Many of our printers make no scruple of gratifying the malice of individuals by false accusations of the fairest characters.’</p>
		<p>[335] Boswell perhaps refers to a book published in 1758, called <i>The Case of Authors by Profession. Gent. Mag</i>. xxviii. 130. Guthrie applies the term to himself in the letter below.</p>
		<p>[336] How much poetry he wrote, I know not: but he informed me, that he was the authour of the beautiful little piece, <i>The Eagle and Robin Redbreast</i>, in the collection of poems entitled <i>The Union</i>, though it is there said to be written by Archibald Scott, before the year 1600. BOSWELL. Mr. P. Cunningham has seen a letter of Jos. Warton’s which states that this poem was written by his brother Tom, who edited the volume. CROKER.</p>
		<p>[337] Dr. A. Carlyle in his <i>Autobiography</i> (p. 191) describes a curious scene that he witnessed in the British Coffee-house. A Captain Cheap ‘was employed by Lord Anson to look out for a proper person to write his voyage. Cheap had a predilection for his countrymen, and having heard of Guthrie, he had come down to the coffee-house to inquire about him. Not long after Cheap had sat down, Guthrie arrived, dressed in laced clothes, and talking loud to everybody, and soon fell awrangling with a gentleman about tragedy and comedy and the unities, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and laid down the law of the drama in a peremptory manner, supporting his arguments with cursing and swearing. I saw Cheap was astonished, when, going to the bar, he asked who this was, and finding it was Guthrie he paid his coffee and slunk off in silence.’ Guthrie’s meanness is shown by the following letter in D’Israeli’s <i>Calamities of Authors</i>, i. 5:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘June 3, 1762.</p>
		<p>‘My Lord,</p>
		<p>‘In the year 1745⁠–⁠6 Mr. Pelham, then First Lord of the Treasury, acquainted me that it was his Majesty’s pleasure I should receive till better provided for, which never has happened, 200£. a year, to be paid by him and his successors in the Treasury. I was satisfied with the august name made use of, and the appointment has been regularly and quarterly paid me ever since. I have been equally punctual in doing the Government all the services that fell within my abilities or sphere of life, especially in those critical situations that call for unanimity in the service of the Crown.</p>
		<p>‘Your Lordship may possibly now suspect that I am an Author by profession; you are not deceived; and will be less so, if you believe that I am disposed to serve his Majesty under your Lordship’s future patronage and protection with greater zeal, if possible, than ever.</p>
		<p>‘I have the honour to be</p>
		<p>‘My Lord <abbr>etc.</abbr></p>
		<h5>‘WILLIAM GUTHRIE.’</h5>
		<p>The lord’s name is not given. See <i>post</i>, spring of 1768, and 1780 in<br/>
		Mr. Langton’s <i>Collection</i> for further mention of Guthrie.<br/></p>
		<p>[338] Perhaps there were Scotticisms for Johnson to correct; for Churchill in <i>The Author</i>, writing of Guthrie, asks:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘With rude unnatural jargon to support Half <i>Scotch</i>, half <i>English</i>, a declining Court</p>
		<p>* * * * *</p>
		<p>Is there not Guthrie?’</p>
		<p><i>Churchill’s Poems</i>, ii. 39.</p>
		<p>[339] See Appendix A.</p>
		<p>[340] Pope, <i>Imitations of Horace</i>, ii. l. 71.</p>
		<p>[341] ‘To give the world assurance of a man.’ <i>Hamlet</i>, Act iii. sc. 4.</p>
		<p>[342] In his <i>Life of Pope</i> Johnson says: ‘This mode of imitation⁠ ⁠… was first practised in the reign of Charles II. by Oldham and Rochester; at least I remember no instances more ancient. It is a kind of middle composition between translation and original design, which pleases when the thoughts are unexpectedly applicable and the parallels lucky. It seems to have been Pope’s favourite amusement, for he has carried it farther than any former poet.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 295.</p>
		<p>[343] I own it pleased me to find amongst them one trait of the manners of the age in London, in the last century, to shield from the sneer of English ridicule, which was some time ago too common a practice in my native city of Edinburgh:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘If what I’ve said can’t from the town affright,<br/>
		Consider other <i>dangers of the night</i>;<br/>
		When brickbats are from upper stories thrown,<br/>
		And <i>emptied chamberpots come pouring down<br/>
		From garret windows</i>.’<br/></p>
		<h5>BOSWELL.</h5>
		<p>See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 14, 1773, where Johnson, on taking his first walk in Edinburgh, ‘grumbled in Boswell’s ear, “I smell you in the dark.” ’ I once spent a night in a town of Corsica, on the great road between Ajaccio and Bastia, where, I was told, this Edinburgh practice was universal. It certainly was the practice of the hotel.</p>
		<p>[344] His Ode <i>Ad Urbanum</i> probably. NICHOLS. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[345] Johnson, on his death-bed, had to own that ‘Cave was a penurious paymaster; he would contract for lines by the hundred, and expect the long hundred.’ See <i>post</i>, Dec. 1784.</p>
		<p>[346] Cave sent the present by Johnson to the unknown author.</p>
		<p>[347] See <i>post</i>, p. 151, note 5.</p>
		<p>[348] The original letter has the following additional paragraph:⁠—‘I beg that you will not delay your answer.’</p>
		<p>[349] In later life Johnson strongly insisted on the importance of fully dating all letters. After giving the date in a letter to Mrs. Thrale, he would add⁠—‘Now there is a date, look at it’ (<i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 109); or, ‘Mark that⁠—you did not put the year to your last’ (<i>Ib</i>. p. 112); or, ‘Look at this and learn’ (<i>Ib</i>. p. 138). She never did learn. The arrangement of the letters in the <i>Piozzi Letters</i> is often very faulty. For an omission of the date by Johnson in late life see <i>post</i>, under March 5, 1774.</p>
		<p>[350] A poem, published in 1737, of which see an account under April 30, 1773⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[351] The learned Mrs. Elizabeth Carter. BOSWELL. She was born Dec. 1717, and died Feb. 19, 1806. She never married. Her father gave her a learned education. Dr. Johnson, speaking of some celebrated scholar [perhaps Langton], said, ‘that he understood Greek better than any one whom he he had ever known, except Elizabeth Carter.’ Pennington’s <i>Carter</i>, i. 13. Writing to her in 1756 he said, ‘Poor dear Cave! I owed him much; for to him I owe that I have known you’ (<i>Ib</i>. p. 40). Her father wrote to her on June 25, 1738:⁠—‘You mention Johnson; but that is a name with which I am utterly unacquainted, Neither his scholastic, critical, or poetical character ever reached my ears. I a little suspect his judgement, if he is very fond of Martial’ (<i>Ib</i>. p. 39). Since 1734 she had written verses for the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. under the name of Eliza (<i>Ib</i>. p. 37)! They are very poor. Her <i>Ode to Melancholy</i> her biographer calls her best. How bad it is three lines will show:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Here, cold to pleasure’s airy forms,<br/>
		Consociate with my sister worms,<br/>
		And mingle with the dead.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>Gent. Mag</i>. ix. 599.</p>
		<p>Hawkins records that Johnson, upon hearing a lady commended for her learning, said:⁠—‘A man is in general better pleased when he has a good dinner upon his table than when his wife talks Greek. My old friend, Mrs. Carter, could make a pudding as well as translate Epictetus.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i> (1787), xi. 205. Johnson, joining her with Hannah More and Fanny Burney, said:⁠—‘Three such women are not to be found.’ <i>Post</i>, May 15, 1784.</p>
		<p>[352] See Voltaire’s <i>Siécle de Louis XIV</i>, ch. xxv..</p>
		<p>[353] At the end of his letter to Cave, quoted <i>post</i>, 1742, he says:⁠—‘The boy found me writing this almost in the dark, when I could not quite easily read yours.’ A man who at times was forced to walk the streets, for want of money to pay for a lodging, was likely also at times to be condemned to idleness for want of a light.</p>
		<p>[354] At the back of this letter is written: ‘Sir, Please to publish the enclosed in your paper of first, and place to acc’t of Mr. Edward Cave. For whom I am, Sir, your hum. ser’t J. Bland. St. John’s Gate, April 6, 1738.’ <i>London</i> therefore was written before April 6.</p>
		<p>[355] Boswell misread the letter. Johnson does not offer to allow the printer to make alterations. He says:⁠—‘I will take the trouble of altering any stroke of satire which you may dislike.’ The law against libel was as unjust as it was severe, and printers ran a great risk.</p>
		<p>[356] Derrick was not merely a poet, but also Master of the Ceremonies at Bath; <i>post</i>, May 16, 1763. For Johnson’s opinion of <i>his</i> ‘Muse’ see <i>post</i> under March 30, 1783. <i>Fortune, a Rhapsody</i>, was published in Nov. 1751. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxi. 527. He is described in <i>Humphrey Clinker</i> in the letters of April 6 and May 6.</p>
		<p>[357] See <i>post</i>, March 20, 1776.</p>
		<p>[358] Six years later Johnson thus wrote of Savage’s <i>Wanderer</i>:⁠—‘From a poem so diligently laboured, and so successfully finished, it might be reasonably expected that he should have gained considerable advantage; nor can it without some degree of indignation and concern be told, that he sold the copy for ten guineas.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 131. Mrs. Piozzi sold in 1788 the copyright of her collection of Johnson’s Letters for £500; <i>post</i>, Feb. 1767.</p>
		<p>[359] The Monks of Medmenham Abbey. See Almon’s <i>Life of Wilkes</i>, iii. 60, for Wilkes’s account of this club. Horace Walpole (<i>Letters</i>, i. 92) calls Whitehead ‘an infamous, but not despicable poet.’</p>
		<p>[360] From <i>The Conference</i>, Churchill’s <i>Poems</i>, ii. 15.</p>
		<p>[361] In the <i>Life of Pope</i> Johnson writes:⁠—‘Paul Whitehead, a small poet, was summoned before the Lords for a poem called <i>Manners</i>, together with Dodsley his publisher. Whitehead, who hung loose upon society, sculked and escaped; but Dodsley’s shop and family made his appearance necessary.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 297. <i>Manners</i> was published in 1739. Dodsley was kept in custody for a week. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. ix. 104. ‘The whole process was supposed to be intended rather to intimidate Pope [who in his <i>Seventeen Hundred and Thirty-Eight</i> had given offence] than to punish Whitehead, and it answered that purpose.’ CHALMERS, quoted in <i>Parl. Hist</i>. x. 1325</p>
		<p>[362] Sir John Hawkins, p. 86, tells us:⁠—‘The event is <i>antedated</i>, in the poem of <i>London</i>; but in every particular, except the difference of a year, what is there said of the departure of Thales, must be understood of Savage, and looked upon as <i>true history</i>.’ This conjecture is, I believe, entirely groundless. I have been assured, that Johnson said he was not so much as acquainted with Savage when he wrote his <i>London</i>. If the departure mentioned in it was the departure of Savage, the event was not <i>antedated</i> but <i>foreseen</i>; for <i>London</i> was published in May, 1738, and Savage did not set out for Wales till July, 1739. However well Johnson could defend the credibility of <i>second sight</i> [see <i>post</i>, Feb. 1766], he did not pretend that he himself was possessed of that faculty. BOSWELL. I am not sure that Hawkins is altogether wrong in his account. Boswell does not state <i>of his own knowledge</i> that Johnson was not acquainted with Savage when he wrote <i>London</i>. The death of Queen Caroline in Nov. 1737 deprived Savage of her yearly bounty, and ‘abandoned him again to fortune’ (Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 166). The elegy on her that he composed on her birth-day (March 1) brought him no reward. He was ‘for some time in suspense,’ but nothing was done. ‘He was in a short time reduced to the lowest degree of distress, and often wanted both lodging and food’ (<i>Ib</i>. p. 169). His friends formed a scheme that ‘he should retire into Wales.’ ‘While this scheme was ripening’ he lodged ‘in the liberties of the Fleet, that he might be secure from his creditors’ (<i>Ib</i>. p. 170). After many delays a subscription was at length raised to provide him with a small pension, and he left London in July 1739 (<i>Ib</i>. p 173). <i>London</i>, as I have shewn, was written before April 6, 1738. That it was written with great rapidity we might infer from the fact that a hundred lines of <i>The Vanity of Human Wishes</i> were written in a day. At this rate <i>London</i> might have been the work of three days. That it was written in a very short time seems to be shown by a passage in the first of these letters to Cave. Johnson says:⁠—‘When I took the liberty of writing to you a few days ago, I did not expect a repetition of the same pleasure so soon;⁠ ⁠… but having the enclosed poem, <abbr>etc.</abbr>’ It is probable that in these few days the poem was written. If we can assume that Savage’s elegy was sent to the Court not later than March 1⁠—it may have been sent earlier⁠—and that Johnson’s poem was written in the last ten days of March, we have three weeks for the intervening events. They are certainly not more than sufficient, if indeed they are sufficient. The coincidence is certainly very striking between Thales’s retirement to ‘Cambria’s solitary shore’ and Savage’s retirement to Wales. There are besides lines in the poem⁠—additions to Juvenal and not translations⁠—which curiously correspond with what Johnson wrote of Savage in his <i>Life</i>. Thus he says that Savage ‘imagined that he should be transported to scenes of flowery felicity;⁠ ⁠… he could not bear⁠ ⁠… to lose the opportunity of listening, without intermission, to the melody of the nightingale, which he believed was to be heard from every bramble, and which he did not fail to mention as a very important part of the happiness of a country life’ (<i>Ib</i>. p. 170). In like manner Thales prays to find:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Some pleasing bank where verdant osiers play,<br/>
		Some peaceful vale, with nature’s paintings gay.<br/></p>
		<p>* * * * *</p>
		<p>There every bush with nature’s musick rings;<br/>
		There every breeze bears health upon its wings.’<br/></p>
		<p>Mr. Croker objects that ‘if Thales had been Savage, Johnson could never have admitted into his poem two lines that point so forcibly at the drunken fray, in which Savage stabbed a Mr. Sinclair, for which he was convicted of <i>murder</i>:⁠—</p>
		<p>“Some frolic <i>drunkard</i>, reeling from a feast, <i>Provokes</i> a broil, and <i>stabs</i> you in a jest.” ’</p>
		<p>But here Johnson is following Juvenal. Mr. Croker forgets that, if Savage was convicted of murder, ‘he was soon after admitted to bail, and pleaded the King’s pardon.’ ‘Persons of distinction’ testified that he was ‘a modest inoffensive man, not inclined to broils or to insolence;’ the witnesses against him were of the lowest character, and his judge had shewn himself as ignorant as he was brutal. Sinclair had been drinking in a brothel, and Savage asserted that he had stabbed him ‘by the necessity of self defence’ (<i>Ib</i>. p. 117). It is, however, not unlikely that Wales was suggested to Johnson as Thales’s retreat by Swift’s lines on Steele, in <i>Miscellanies in Prose and Verse</i> (v. 181), published only three years before <i>London</i>:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Thus Steele who owned what others writ,<br/>
		And flourished by imputed wit,<br/>
		From perils of a hundred jails<br/>
		Withdrew to starve and die in Wales.’<br/></p>
		<p>[363] The first dialogue was registered at Stationers’ Hall, 12th May, 1738, under the title <i>One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty Eight</i>. The second dialogue was registered 17th July, 1738, as <i>One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty Eight, Dialogue</i> 2. Elwin’s <i>Pope</i>, iii. 455.</p>
		<p>David Hume was in London this spring, finding a publisher for his first work, <i>A Treatise of Human Nature</i>. J. H. Burton’s <i>Hume</i>, i. 66.</p>
		<p>[364] Pope had published <i>Imitations of Horace</i>.</p>
		<p>[365] P. 269. BOSWELL. ‘Short extracts from <i>London, a Poem</i>, become remarkable for having got to the second edition in the space of a week.’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>. viii. 269. The price of the poem was one shilling. Pope’s satire, though sold at the same price, was longer in reaching its second edition (<i>Ib</i>. p. 280).</p>
		<p>[366]</p>
		<p>‘One driven by strong benevolence of soul<br/>
		Shall fly, like Oglethorpe, from pole to pole.’<br/></p>
		<p>Pope’s <i>Imitations of Horace</i>, ii. 2. 276.</p>
		<p>‘General Oglethorpe, died 1785, earned commemoration in Pope’s gallery of worthies by his Jacobite politics. He was, however, a remarkable man. He first directed attention to the abuses of the London jails. His relinquishment of all the attractions of English life and fortune for the settlement of the colony of Georgia is as romantic a story at that of Bishop Berkeley’ (Pattison’s <i>Pope</i>, p. 152). It is very likely that Johnson’s regard for Oglethorpe was greatly increased by the stand that he and his brother-trustees in the settlement of Georgia made against slavery (see <i>post</i>, Sept. 23, 1777). ‘The first principle which they laid down in their laws was that no slave should be employed. This was regarded at the time as their great and fundamental error; it was afterwards repealed’ (Southey’s <i>Wesley</i>, i. 75). In spite, however, of Oglethorpe’s ‘strong benevolence of soul’ he at one time treated Charles Wesley, who was serving as a missionary in Georgia, with great brutality (<i>Ib</i>. p. 88). According to Benjamin Franklin (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 162) Georgia was settled with little forethought. ‘Instead of being made with hardy industrious husbandmen, it was with families of broken shop-keepers, and other insolvent debtors; many of idle habits, taken out of the jails, who being set down in the woods, unqualified for clearing land, and unable to endure the hardships of a new settlement, perished in numbers, leaving many helpless children unprovided for.’ Johnson wished to write Oglethorpe’s life; <i>post</i>, April 10, 1775.</p>
		<p>[367] Horace Walpole (<i>Letters</i>, viii. 548), writing of him 47 years after <i>London</i> was published, when he was 87 years old, says:⁠—‘His eyes, ears, articulation, limbs, and memory would suit a boy, if a boy could recollect a century backwards. His teeth are gone; he is a shadow, and a wrinkled one; but his spirits and his spirit are in full bloom: two years and a-half ago he challenged a neighbouring gentleman for trespassing on his manor.’</p>
		<p>[368] Once Johnson being at dinner at Sir Joshua’s in company with many painters, in the course of conversation Richardson’s <i>Treatise on Painting</i> happened to be mentioned, ‘Ah!’ said Johnson, ‘I remember, when I was at college, I by chance found that book on my stairs. I took it up with me to my chamber, and read it through, and truly I did not think it possible to say so much upon the art.’ Sir Joshua desired of one of the company to be informed what Johnson had said; and it being repeated to him so loud that Johnson heard it, the Doctor seemed hurt, and added, ‘But I did not wish, Sir, that Sir Joshua should have been told what I then said.’ Northcote’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 236. Jonathan Richardson the painter had published several works on painting before Johnson went to college. He and his son, Jonathan Richardson, junior, brought out together <i>Explanatory Notes on Paradise Lost</i>.</p>
		<p>[369] Sir Joshua Reynolds, from the information of the younger Richardson. BOSWELL. See <i>post</i>, Oct. 16, 1769, where Johnson himself relates this anecdote. According to Murphy, ‘Pope said, “The author, whoever he is, will not be long concealed;” alluding to the passage in Terence [<i>Eun</i>. ii. 3, 4], <i>Ubi, ubi est, diu celari non potest</i>.’ Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 35.</p>
		<p>[370] Such as <i>far</i> and <i>air</i>, which comes twice; <i>vain</i> and <i>man</i>, <i>despair</i> and <i>bar</i>.</p>
		<p>[371] It is, however, remarkable, that he uses the epithet, which undoubtedly, since the union between England and Scotland, ought to denominate the natives of both parts of our island:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Was early taught a BRITON’S rights to prize.’</p>
		<h5>BOSWELL.</h5>
		<p>Swift, in his <i>Journal to Stella</i> (Nov. 23, 1711), having to mention England, continues:⁠—‘I never will call it <i>Britain</i>, pray don’t call it Britain.’ In a letter written on Aug. 8, 1738, again mentioning England, he adds⁠—‘Pox on the modern phrase Great Britain, which is only to distinguish it from Little Britain, where old clothes and old books are to be bought and sold’ (Swift’s <i>Works</i>, 1803, xx. 185). George III ‘gloried in being born a Briton;’ <i>post</i>, 1760. Boswell thrice more at least describes Johnson as ‘a true-born Englishman;’ <i>post</i>, under Feb. 7, 1775, under March 30, 1783, and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i> under Aug. 11, 1773. The quotation is from <i>Richard II</i>, Act i. sc. 3.</p>
		<p>[372]</p>
		<p>‘For who would leave, unbrib’d, Hibernia’s land,<br/>
		Or change the rocks of Scotland for the Strand?<br/>
		There none are swept by sudden fate away,<br/>
		But all, whom hunger spares, with age decay.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>London</i>, 1. 9⁠–⁠12.</p>
		<p>[373] In the <i>Life of Savage</i>, Johnson, criticising the settlement of colonies, as it is considered by the poet and the politician, seems to be criticising himself. ‘The politician, when he considers men driven into other countries for shelter, and obliged to retire to forests and deserts, and pass their lives, and fix their posterity, in the remotest corners of the world, to avoid those hardships which they suffer or fear in their native place, may very properly enquire, why the legislature does not provide a remedy for these miseries, rather than encourage an escape from them. He may conclude that the flight of every honest man is a loss to the community.⁠ ⁠… The poet guides the unhappy fugitive from want and persecution to plenty, quiet, and security, and seats him in scenes of peaceful solitude, and undisturbed repose.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 156.</p>
		<p>[374] Three years later Johnson wrote:⁠—‘Mere unassisted merit advances slowly, if, what is not very common, it advances at all.’ <i>Ib</i>. vi. 393.</p>
		<p>[375] ‘The busy <i>hum</i> of men.’ Milton’s <i>L’Allegro</i>, 1. 118.</p>
		<p>[376] See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 21, 1773, and <i>post</i>, March 21, 1775, for Johnson’s attack on Lord Chatham. In the <i>Life of Thomson</i> Johnson wrote:⁠—‘At this time a long course of opposition to Sir Robert Walpole had filled the nation with clamours for liberty, of which no man felt the want, and with care for liberty, which was not in danger.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 370. Hawkins says (<i>Life</i>, p. 514);⁠—‘Of Walpole he had a high opinion. He said of him that he was a fine fellow, and that his very enemies deemed him so before his death. He honoured his memory for having kept this country in peace many years, as also for the goodness and placability of his temper.’ Horace Walpole (<i>Letters</i>, v. 509), says:⁠—‘My father alone was capable of acting on one great plan of honesty from the beginning of his life to the end. He could for ever wage war with knaves and malice, and preserve his temper; could know men, and yet feel for them; could smile when opposed, and be gentle after triumph.’</p>
		<p>[377] Johnson in the <i>Life of Milton</i> describes himself:⁠—‘Milton was naturally a thinker for himself, confident of his own abilities, and disdainful of help or hindrance. From his contemporaries he neither courted nor received support; there is in his writings nothing by which the pride of other authors might be gratified, or favour gained; no exchange of praise, nor solicitation of support.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 142. See <i>post</i> Feb. 1766, for Johnson’s opinion on ‘courting great men.’</p>
		<p>[378] In a billet written by Mr. Pope in the following year, this school is said to have been in <i>Shropshire</i>; but as it appears from a letter from Earl Gower, that the trustees of it were ‘some worthy gentlemen in Johnson’s neighbourhood,’ I in my first edition suggested that Pope must have, by mistake, written Shropshire, instead of Staffordshire. But I have since been obliged to Mr. Spearing, attorney-at-law, for the following information:⁠—‘William Adams, formerly citizen and haberdasher of London, founded a school at Newport, in the county of Salop, by deed dated 27th November, 1656, by which he granted “the yearly sum of <i>sixty pounds</i> to such able and learned schoolmaster, from time to time, being of godly life and conversation, who should have been educated at one of the Universities of Oxford or Cambridge, and had taken the degree of <i>Master of Arts</i>, and was well read in the Greek and Latin tongues, as should be nominated from time to time by the said William Adams, during his life, and after the decease of the said William Adams, by the Governours (namely, the Master and Wardens of the Haberdashers’ Company of the City of London) and their successors.” The manour and lands out of which the revenues for the maintenance of the school were to issue are situate <i>at Knighton and Adbaston, in the county of Stafford</i>.’ From the foregoing account of this foundation, particularly the circumstances of the salary being sixty pounds, and the degree of Master of Arts being a requisite qualification in the teacher, it seemed probable that this was the school in contemplation; and that Lord Gower erroneously supposed that the gentlemen who possessed the lands, out of which the revenues issued, were trustees of the charity.</p>
		<p>Such was probable conjecture. But in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for May, 1793, there is a letter from Mr. Henn, one of the masters of the school of Appleby, in Leicestershire, in which he writes as follows:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘I compared time and circumstance together, in order to discover whether the school in question might not be this of Appleby. Some of the trustees at that period were “worthy gentlemen of the neighbourhood of Litchfield.” Appleby itself is not far from the neighbourhood of Litchfield. The salary, the degree requisite, together with the <i>time of election</i>, all agreeing with the statutes of Appleby. The election, as said in the letter, “could not be delayed longer than the 11th of next month,” which was the 11th of September, just three months after the annual audit-day of Appleby school, which is always on the 11th of June; and the statutes enjoin <i>ne ullius praeceptorum electio diutius tribus mensibus moraretur, etc</i>.</p>
		<p>‘These I thought to be convincing proofs that my conjecture was not ill-founded, and that, in a future edition of that book, the circumstance might be recorded as fact.</p>
		<p>‘But what banishes every shadow of doubt is the <i>Minute-book</i> of the school, which declares the headmastership to be <i>at that time</i> VACANT.’</p>
		<p>I cannot omit returning thanks to this learned gentleman for the very handsome manner in which he has in that letter been so good as to speak of this work. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[379] ‘What a pity it is, Sir,’ said to him Sir William Scott, afterwards Lord Stowell, ‘that you did not follow the profession of the law! You might have been Lord Chancellor of Great Britain’ <i>Post</i>, April 17, 1778.</p>
		<p>[380] See <i>post</i>, beginning of 1770.</p>
		<p>[381] See <i>post</i>, March 21, 1775.</p>
		<p>[382] In the <i>Weekly Miscellany</i>, October 21, 1738, there appeared the following advertisement:⁠—‘Just published, Proposals for printing the <i>History of the Council of Trent</i>, translated from the Italian of Father Paul Sarpi; with the Authour’s Life, and Notes theological, historical, and critical, from the French edition of Dr. Le Courayer. To which are added, Observations on the History, and Notes and Illustrations from various Authours, both printed and manuscript. By S. Johnson. 1. The work will consist of two hundred sheets, and be two volumes in quarto, printed on good paper and letter. 2. The price will be 18_s_. each volume, to be paid, half-a-guinea at the delivery of the first volume, and the rest at the delivery of the second volume in sheets. 3. Two-pence to be abated for every sheet less than two hundred. It may be had on a large paper, in three volumes, at the price of three guineas; one to be paid at the time of subscribing, another at the delivery of the first, and the rest at the delivery of the other volumes. The work is now in the press, and will be diligently prosecuted. Subscriptions are taken in by Mr. Dodsley in Pall-Mall, Mr. Rivington in St. Paul’s Church-yard, by E. Cave at St. John’s Gate, and the Translator, at No. 6, in Castle-street by Cavendish-square.’ BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[383] They afterwards appeared in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. [viii. 486] with this title⁠—’<i>Verses to Lady Firebrace, at Bury Assizes</i>.’ BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[384] Du Halde’s Description of China was then publishing by Mr. Cave in weekly numbers, whence Johnson was to select pieces for the embellishment of the <i>Magazine</i>. NICHOLS. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[385] The premium of forty pounds proposed for the best poem on the Divine Attributes is here alluded to. NICHOLS. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[386] The Compositors in Mr. Cave’s printing-office, who appear by this letter to have then waited for copy. NICHOLS. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[387] Twenty years later, when he was lodging in the Temple, he had fasted for two days at a time; ‘he had drunk tea, but eaten no bread; this was no intentional fasting, but happened just in the course of a literary life.’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 4, 1773. See <i>post</i>, Aug. 5, 1763.</p>
		<p>[388] Birch MSS. Brit. Mus. 4323. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[389] See <i>post</i>, under Dec. 30, 1747, and Oct. 24, 1780.</p>
		<p>[390] See <i>post</i>, 1750.</p>
		<p>[391] This book was published. BOSWELL. I have not been able to find it.</p>
		<p>[392] <i>The Historie of four-footed beasts and serpents</i>. By Edward Topsell. London, 1607. Isaac Walton, in the <i>Complete Angler</i>, more than once quotes Topsel. See p. 99 in the reprint of the first edition, where he says:⁠—‘As our Topsel hath with great diligence observed.’</p>
		<p>[393] In this preface he describes some pieces as ‘deserving no other fate than to be hissed, torn, and forgotten. Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 346.</p>
		<p>[394] The letter to Mr. Urban in the January number of this year (p. 3) is, I believe, by Johnson.</p>
		<p>[395] ‘Yet did Boerhaave not suffer one branch of science to withdraw his attention from others; anatomy did not withhold him from chymistry, nor chymistry, enchanting as it is, from the study of botany.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 276. See <i>post</i>, under Sept. 9, 1779.</p>
		<p>[396] <i>Gent. Mag</i>. viii. 210, and Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, i. 170.</p>
		<p>[397] What these verses are is not clear. On p. 372 there is an epigram <i>Ad Elisam Popi Horto Lauras carpentem</i>, of which on p. 429 there are three translations. That by Urbanus may be Johnson’s.</p>
		<p>[398] <i>Ib</i>. p. 654, and Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, i. 170. On p. 211 of this volume of the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. is given the epigram ‘To a lady who spoke in defence of liberty.’ This was ‘Molly Aston’ mentioned <i>ante</i>, p. 83.</p>
		<p>[399] To the year 1739 belongs <i>Considerations on the Case of Dr. T[rapp]s Sermons. Abridged by Mr. Cave, 1739</i>; first published in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. of July 1787. (See <i>post</i> under Nov. 5, 1784, note.) Cave had begun to publish in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. an abridgment of four sermons preached by Trapp against Whitefield. He stopped short in the publication, deterred perhaps by the threat of a prosecution for an infringement of copy-right. ‘On all difficult occasions,’ writes the Editor in 1787, ‘Johnson was Cave’s oracle; and the paper now before us was certainly written on that occasion.’ Johnson argues that abridgments are not only legal but also justifiable. ‘The design of an abridgment is to benefit mankind by facilitating the attainment of knowledge⁠ ⁠… for as an incorrect book is lawfully criticised, and false assertions justly confuted⁠ ⁠… so a tedious volume may no less lawfully be abridged, because it is better that the proprietors should suffer some damage, than that the acquisition of knowledge should be obstructed with unnecessary difficulties, and the valuable hours of thousands thrown away.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 465. Whether we have here Johnson’s own opinion cannot be known. He was writing as Cave’s advocate. See also Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 20, 1773.</p>
		<p>[400] In his <i>Life of Thomson</i> Johnson writes:⁠—‘About this time the act was passed for licensing plays, of which the first operation was the prohibition of <i>Gustavus Vasa</i>, a tragedy of Mr. Brooke, whom the public recompensed by a very liberal subscription; the next was the refusal of <i>Edward and Eleonora</i>, offered by Thomson. It is hard to discover why either play should have been obstructed.’ Johnson’s Works, viii. 373.</p>
		<p>[401] The Inscription and the Translation of it are preserved in the <i>London Magazine</i> for the year 1739, p. 244. BOSWELL. See Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 89.</p>
		<p>[402] It is a little heavy in its humour, and does not compare well with the like writings of Swift and the earlier wits.</p>
		<p>[403] Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 72.</p>
		<p>[404]</p>
		<p>‘Sic fatus senior, telumque imbelle sine ictu Conjecit.’ ‘So spake the elder, and cast forth a toothless spear and vain.’</p>
		<p>Morris, <i>Æneids</i>, ii. 544.</p>
		<p>[405]</p>
		<p>‘Get all your verses printed fair,<br/>
		 Then let them well be dried;<br/>
		And Curll must have a special care<br/>
		 To leave the margin wide.<br/>
		Lend these to paper-sparing Pope;<br/>
		 And when he sits to write,<br/>
		No letter with an envelope<br/>
		 Could give him more delight.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>Advice to the Grub Street Verse-Writers</i>. (Swift’s <i>Works</i>, 1803, xi 32.) Nichols, in a note on this passage, says:⁠—‘The original copy of Pope’s <i>Homer</i> is almost entirely written on the covers of letters, and sometimes between the lines of the letters themselves.’ Johnson, in his <i>Life of Pope</i>, writes:⁠—‘Of Pope’s domestic character frugality was a part eminently remarkable.⁠ ⁠… This general care must be universally approved; but it sometimes appeared in petty artifices of parsimony, such as the practice of writing his compositions on the back of letters, as may be seen in the remaining copy of the <i>Iliad</i>, by which perhaps in five years five shillings were saved.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 312.</p>
		<p>[406] See note, p. 132. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[407] The <i>Marmor Norfolciense</i>, price one shilling, is advertised in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for 1739 (p. 220) among the books for April.</p>
		<p>[408] <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>, 3rd edit. p. 8. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[409] According to Sir Joshua Reynolds, ‘Every person who knew Dr. Johnson must have observed that the moment he was left out of the conversation, whether from his deafness or from whatever cause, but a few minutes without speaking or listening, his mind appeared to be preparing itself. He fell into a reverie accompanied with strange antic gestures; but this he never did when his mind was engaged by the conversation. These were therefore improperly called convulsions, which imply involuntary contortions; whereas, a word addressed to him, his attention was recovered. Sometimes, indeed, it would be near a minute before he would give an answer, looking as if he laboured to bring his mind to bear on the question’ (Taylor’s <i>Reynolds</i>, ii. 456). ‘I still, however, think,’ wrote Boswell, ‘that these gestures were involuntary; for surely had not that been the case, he would have restrained them in the public streets’ (Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, under date of Aug. 11, 1773, note). Dr. T. Campbell, in his <i>Diary of a Visit to England</i>, p. 33, writing of Johnson on March 16, 1775, says:⁠—‘He has the aspect of an idiot, without the faintest ray of sense gleaming from any one feature⁠—with the most awkward garb, and unpowdered grey wig, on one side only of his head⁠—he is for ever dancing the devil’s jig, and sometimes he makes the most driveling effort to whistle some thought in his absent paroxysms.’ Miss Burney thus describes him when she first saw him in 1778:⁠—‘Soon after we were seated this great man entered. I have so true a veneration for him that the very sight of him inspires me with delight and reverence, notwithstanding the cruel infirmities to which he is subject; for he has almost perpetual convulsive movements, either of his hands, lips, feet, or knees, and sometimes of all together.’ Mme. D’Arblay’s <i>Diary</i>, i. 63. See <i>post</i>, under March 30, 1783, Boswell’s note on Johnson’s peculiarities.</p>
		<p>[410] ‘Solitude,’ wrote Reynolds, ‘to him was horror; nor would he ever trust himself alone but when employed in writing or reading. He has often begged me to go home with him to prevent his being alone in the coach. Any company was better than none; by which he connected himself with many mean persons whose presence he could command.’ Taylor’s <i>Reynolds</i>, ii. 455. Johnson writing to Mrs. Thrale, said:⁠—‘If the world be worth winning, let us enjoy it; if it is to be despised, let us despise it by conviction. But the world is not to be despised but as it is compared with something better. Company is in itself better than solitude, and pleasure better than indolence.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 242. In <i>The Idler</i>, No. 32, he wrote:⁠—‘Others are afraid to be alone, and amuse themselves by a perpetual succession of companions; but the difference is not great; in solitude we have our dreams to ourselves, and in company we agree to dream in concert. The end sought in both is forgetfulness of ourselves.’ In <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 5, he wrote:⁠—‘It may be laid down as a position which will seldom deceive, that when a man cannot bear his own company, there is something wrong. He must fly from himself, either because he feels a tediousness in life from the equipoise of an empty mind⁠ ⁠… or he must be afraid of the intrusion of some unpleasing ideas, and, perhaps, is struggling to escape from the remembrance of a loss, the fear of a calamity, or some other thought of greater horror.’</p>
		<p>Cowper, whose temperament was in some respects not unlike Johnson’s, wrote:⁠—‘A vacant hour is my abhorrence; because, when I am not occupied, I suffer under the whole influence of my unhappy temperament.’ Southey’s <i>Cowper</i>, vi. 146.</p>
		<p>[411] Richardson was of the same way of thinking as Hogarth. Writing of a speech made at the Oxford Commemoration of 1754 by the Jacobite Dr. King (see <i>post</i>, Feb. 1755), he said:⁠—‘There cannot be a greater instance of the lenity of the government he abuses than his pestilent harangues so publicly made with impunity furnishes (<i>sic</i>) all his readers with.’⁠—<i>Rich. Corresp</i>. ii. 197.</p>
		<p>[412] Impartial posterity may, perhaps, be as little inclined as Dr. Johnson was to justify the uncommon rigour exercised in the case of Dr. Archibald Cameron. He was an amiable and truly honest man; and his offence was owing to a generous, though mistaken principle of duty. Being obliged, after 1746, to give up his profession as a physician, and to go into foreign parts, he was honoured with the rank of Colonel, both in the French and Spanish service. He was a son of the ancient and respectable family of Cameron, of Lochiel; and his brother, who was the Chief of that brave clan, distinguished himself by moderation and humanity, while the Highland army marched victorious through Scotland. It is remarkable of this Chief, that though he had earnestly remonstrated against the attempt as hopeless, he was of too heroick a spirit not to venture his life and fortune in the cause, when personally asked by him whom he thought his prince. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>Sir Walter Scott states, in his Introduction to <i>Redgauntlet</i>, that the government of George II were in possession of sufficient evidence that Dr. Cameron had returned to the Highlands, <i>not</i>, as he alleged on his trial, for family affairs merely, but as the secret agent of the Pretender in a new scheme of rebellion: the ministers, however, preferred trying this indefatigable partisan on the ground of his undeniable share in the insurrection of 1745, rather than rescuing themselves and their master from the charge of harshness, at the expense of making it universally known, that a fresh rebellion had been in agitation so late as 1752. LOCKHART. He was executed on June 7, 1753. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxiii. 292. Lord Campbell (<i>Lives of the Chancellors</i>, v. 109) says:⁠—‘I regard his execution as a wanton atrocity.’ Horace Walpole, however, inclined to the belief that Cameron was engaged in a new scheme of rebellion. Walpole’s <i>Memoirs of George II</i>, i. 333.</p>
		<p>[413] Horace Walpole says that towards convicts under sentence of death ‘George II’s disposition in general was merciful, if the offence was not murder.’ He mentions, however, a dreadful exception, when the King sent to the gallows at Oxford a young man who had been ‘guilty of a most trifling forgery,’ though he had been recommended to mercy by the Judge, who ‘had assured him his pardon.’ Mercy was refused, merely because the Judge, Willes, ‘was attached to the Prince of Wales.’ It is very likely that this was one of Johnson’s ‘instances,’ as it had happened about four years earlier, and as an account of the young man had been published by an Oxonian. Walpole’s <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George II</i>, i. 175.</p>
		<p>[414] It is strange that when Johnson had been sixteen years in London he should not be known to Hogarth by sight. ‘Mr. Hogarth,’ writes Mrs. Piozzi, ‘was used to be very earnest that I should obtain the acquaintance, and if possible, the friendship of Dr. Johnson, “whose conversation was to the talk of other men, like Titian’s painting compared to Hudson’s,” he said.⁠ ⁠… Of Dr. Johnson, when my father and he were talking together about him one day, “That man,” says Hogarth, “is not contented with believing the Bible, but he fairly resolves, I think, to believe nothing <i>but</i> the Bible.” ’ Piozzi’s <i>Anec</i>. p. 136.</p>
		<p>[415] On October 29 of this year James Boswell was born.</p>
		<p>[416] In this preface is found the following lively passage:⁠—‘The Roman Gazetteers are defective in several material ornaments of style. They never end an article with the mystical hint, <i>this occasions great speculation</i>. They seem to have been ignorant of such engaging introductions as, <i>we hear it is strongly reported</i>; and of that ingenious, but thread-bare excuse for a downright lie, <i>it wants confirmation</i>.’</p>
		<p>[417] The <i>Lives</i> of Blake and Drake were certainly written with a political aim. The war with Spain was going on, and the Tory party was doing its utmost to rouse the country against the Spaniards. It was ‘a time,’ according to Johnson, ‘when the nation was engaged in a war with an enemy, whose insults, ravages, and barbarities have long called for vengeance.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 293.</p>
		<p>[418] Barretier’s childhood surpassed even that of J. S. Mill. At the age of nine he was master of five languages, Greek and Hebrew being two of them. ‘In his twelfth year he applied more particularly to the study of the fathers.’ At the age of fourteen he published <i>Anti-Artemonius; sive initium evangelii S. Joannis adversus Artemonium vindicatum</i>. The same year the University of Halle offered him the degree of doctor in philosophy. ‘His theses, or philosophical positions, which he printed, ran through several editions in a few weeks.’ He was a deep student of mathematics, and astronomy was his favourite subject. His health broke down under his studies, and he died in 1740 in the twentieth year of his age. Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 376.</p>
		<p>[419] He wrote also in 1756 <i>A Dissertation on the Epitaphs written by Pope</i>.</p>
		<p>[420] See <i>post</i>, Oct. 16, 1769.</p>
		<p>[421] In the original <i>and</i>. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. x. 464. The title of this poem as there given is:⁠—‘An epitaph upon the celebrated Claudy Philips, Musician, who died very poor.’</p>
		<p>[422] The epitaph of Phillips is in the porch of Wolverhampton Church. The prose part of it is curious:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Near this place lies<br/>
		 Charles Claudius Phillips,<br/>
		 Whose absolute contempt of riches<br/>
		 and inimitable performances upon the<br/>
		 violin<br/>
		 made him the admiration of all that<br/>
		 knew him.<br/>
		 He was born in Wales,<br/>
		 made the tour of Europe,<br/>
		 and, after the experience of both<br/>
		 kinds of fortune,<br/>
		 Died in 1732.’<br/></p>
		<p>Mr. Garrick appears not to have recited the verses correctly, the original being as follows:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Exalted soul, <i>thy various sounds</i> could please<br/>
		 The love-sick virgin and the gouty ease;<br/>
		 Could jarring <i>crowds</i>, like old Amphion, move<br/>
		 To beauteous order and harmonious love;<br/>
		 Rest here in peace, till Angels bid thee rise,<br/>
		 And meet thy Saviour’s <i>consort</i> in the skies.’ BLAKEWAY.<br/></p>
		<p><i>Consort</i> is defined in Johnson’s <i>Dictionary</i> as <i>a number of instruments playing together</i>.</p>
		<p>[423] I have no doubt that it was written in 1741; for the second line is clearly a parody of a line in the chorus of Cibber’s <i>Birthday Ode</i> for that year. The chorus is as follows:</p>
		<p>‘While thou our Master of the Main<br/>
		Revives Eliza’s glorious reign,<br/>
		The great Plantagenets look down,<br/>
		And see <i>your</i> race adorn your crown.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>Gent. Mag</i>. xi. 549.</p>
		<p>In the <i>Life of Barretier</i> Johnson had also this fling at George<br/>
		II:⁠—‘Princes are commonly the last by whom merit is distinguished.’<br/>
		Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 381.<br/></p>
		<p>[424] See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 23 and Nov. 21, 1773.</p>
		<p>[425] Hester Lynch Salusbury, afterwards Mrs. Thrale, and later on Mrs. Piozzi, was born on Jan. 27, 1741.</p>
		<p>[426] This piece is certainly not by Johnson. It contains more than one ungrammatical passage. It is impossible to believe that he wrote such a sentence as the following:⁠—‘Another having a cask of wine sealed up at the top, but his servant boring a hole at the bottom stole the greatest part of it away; sometime after, having called a friend to taste his wine, he found the vessel almost empty,’ <abbr>etc.</abbr></p>
		<p>[427] Mr. Carlyle, by the use of the term ‘Imaginary Editors’ (<i>Cromwell’s Letters and Speeches</i>, iii. 229), seems to imply that he does not hold with Boswell in assigning this piece to Johnson. I am inclined to think, nevertheless, that Boswell is right. If it is Johnson’s it is doubly interesting as showing the method which he often followed in writing the Parliamentary Debates. When notes were given him, while for the most part he kept to the speaker’s train of thoughts, he dealt with the language much as it pleased him. In the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. Cromwell speaks as if he were wearing a flowing wig and were addressing a Parliament of the days of George II. He is thus made to conclude Speech xi:⁠—‘For my part, could I multiply my person or dilate my power, I should dedicate myself wholly to this great end, in the prosecution of which I shall implore the blessing of God upon your counsels and endeavours.’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xi. 100. The following are the words which correspond to this in the original:⁠—‘If I could help you to many, and multiply myself into many, that would be to serve you in regard to settlement.⁠ ⁠… But I shall pray to God Almighty that He would direct you to do what is according to His will. And this is that poor account I am able to give of myself in this thing.’ Carlyle’s <i>Cromwell</i>, iii. 255.</p>
		<p>[428] See Appendix A.</p>
		<p>[429] Lord Chesterfield.</p>
		<p>[430] Duke of Newcastle.</p>
		<p>[431] I suppose in another compilation of the same kind. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[432] Doubtless, Lord Hardwick. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[433] The delivery of letters by the penny-post ‘was originally confined to the cities of London and Westminster, the borough of Southwark and the respective suburbs thereof.’ In 1801 the postage was raised to twopence. The term ‘suburbs’ must have had a very limited signification, for it was not till 1831 that the limits of this delivery were extended to all places within three miles of the General Post Office. <i>Ninth Report of the Commissioners of the Post Office</i>, 1837, p. 4.</p>
		<p>[434] Birch’s <i>MSS. in the British Museum</i>, 4302. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[435] See <i>post</i>, Dec. 1784, in Nichols’s <i>Anecdotes</i>. If we may trust Hawkins, it is likely that Johnson’s ‘tenderness of conscience’ cost Cave a good deal; for he writes that, while Johnson composed the <i>Debates</i>, the sale of the <i>Magazine</i> increased from ten to fifteen thousand copies a month. ‘Cave manifested his good fortune by buying an old coach and a pair of older horses.’ Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, P. 123.</p>
		<p>[436] I am assured that the editor is Mr. George Chalmers, whose commercial works are well known and esteemed. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[437] The characteristic of Pulteney’s oratory is thus given in Hazlitts <i>Northcole’s Conversations</i> (p. 288):⁠—‘Old Mr. Tolcher used to say of the famous Pulteney⁠—“My Lord Bath always speaks in blank verse.” ’</p>
		<p>[438] Hawkins’s <i>Life of Johnson</i>, p. 100. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[439] A bookseller of London. BOSWELL</p>
		<p>[440] Not the Royal Society; but the Society for the encouragement of learning, of which Dr. Birch was a leading member. Their object was to assist authors in printing expensive works. It existed from about 1735 to 1746, when having incurred a considerable debt, it was dissolved. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[441] There is no erasure here, but a mere blank; to fill up which may be an exercise for ingenious conjecture. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[442] Johnson, writing to Dr. Taylor on June 10, 1742, says:⁠—‘I propose to get <i>Charles of Sweden</i> ready for this winter, and shall therefore, as I imagine, be much engaged for some months with the dramatic writers into whom I have scarcely looked for many years. Keep <i>Irene</i> close, you may send it back at your leisure.’ <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S., v. 303. <i>Charles of Sweden</i> must have been a play which he projected.</p>
		<p>[443] The profligate sentiment was, that ‘to tell a secret to a friend is no breach of fidelity, because the number of persons trusted is not multiplied, a man and his friend being virtually the same.’ <i>Rambler</i>, No. 13.</p>
		<p>[444] <i>Journal of a tour to the Hebrides</i>, 3rd edit. p. 167. [Sept. 10, 1773.] BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[445] This piece contains a passage in honour of some great critic. ‘May the shade, at least, of one great English critick rest without disturbance; and may no man presume to insult his memory, who wants his learning, his reason, or his wit.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 182. Bentley had died on July 14 of this year, and there can be little question that Bentley is meant.</p>
		<p>[446] See <i>post</i>, end of 1744.</p>
		<p>[447] ‘There is nothing to tell, dearest lady, but that he was insolent and I beat him, and that he was a blockhead and told of it, which I should never have done.⁠ ⁠… I have beat many a fellow, but the rest had the wit to hold their tongues.’ Piozzi’s <i>Anec</i>. p. 233. In the <i>Life of Pope</i> Johnson thus mentions Osborne:⁠—‘Pope was ignorant enough of his own interest to make another change, and introduced Osborne contending for the prize among the booksellers [<i>Dunciad</i>, ii. 167]. Osborne was a man entirely destitute of shame, without sense of any disgrace but that of poverty.⁠ ⁠… The shafts of satire were directed equally in vain against Cibber and Osborne; being repelled by the impenetrable impudence of one, and deadened by the impassive dulness of the other.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 302.</p>
		<p>[448] In the original <i>contentions</i>.</p>
		<p>[449] ‘Dec. 21, 1775. In the Paper Office there is a wight, called Thomas Astle, who lives like moths on old parchments.’ Walpole’s <i>Letters</i>, vi. 299.</p>
		<p>[450] Savage died on Aug. 1, 1743, so that this letter is misplaced.</p>
		<p>[451] The Plain Dealer was published in 1724, and contained some account of Savage. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[452] In the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for Sept. 1743 (p. 490) there is an epitaph on R⁠⸺⁠d S⁠⸺⁠e, Esq., which may perhaps be this inscription. ‘His life was want,’ this epitaph declares. It is certainly not the Runick Inscription in the number for March 1742, as Malone suggests; for the earliest possible date of this letter is seventeen months later.</p>
		<p>[453] I have not discovered what this was. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[454] The <i>Mag.-Extraordinary</i> is perhaps the Supplement to the December number of each year.</p>
		<p>[455] This essay contains one sentiment eminently Johnsonian. The writer had shown how patiently Confucius endured extreme indigence. He adds:⁠—‘This constancy cannot raise our admiration after his former conquest of himself; for how easily may he support pain who has been able to resist pleasure.’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xii. 355.</p>
		<p>[456] In this Preface there is a complaint that has been often repeated⁠—‘All kinds of learning have given way to politicks.’</p>
		<p>[457] In the <i>Life of Pope</i> (Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 287) Johnson says that Crousaz, ‘however little known or regarded here, was no mean antagonist’</p>
		<p>[458] It is not easy to believe that Boswell had read this essay, for there is nothing metaphysical in what Johnson wrote. Two-thirds of the paper are a translation from Crousaz. Boswell does not seem to have distinguished between Crousaz’s writings and Johnson’s. We have here a striking instance of the way in which Cave sometimes treated his readers. One-third of this essay is given in the number for March, the rest in the number for November.</p>
		<p>[459]</p>
		<p>Angliacas inter pulcherrima Laura puellas,<br/>
		 Mox uteri pondus depositura grave,<br/>
		Adsit, Laura, tibi facilis Lucina dolenti,<br/>
		 Neve tibi noceat praenituisse Deae.<br/></p>
		<p>Mr. Hector was present when this Epigram was made <i>impromptu</i>. The first line was proposed by Dr. James, and Johnson was called upon by the company to finish it, which he instantly did. BOSWELL. Macaulay (<i>Essays</i>, i. 364) criticises Mr. Croker’s criticism of this epigram.</p>
		<p>[460] The lines with which this poem is introduced seem to show that it cannot be Johnson’s. He was not the man to allow that haste of performance was any plea for indulgence. They are as follows:⁠—‘Though several translations of Mr. Pope’s verses on his Grotto have already appeared, we hope that the following attempt, which, we are assured, was the casual amusement of half an hour during several solicitations to proceed, will neither be unacceptable to our readers, nor (these circumstances considered) dishonour the persons concerned by a hasty publication.’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xiii. 550.</p>
		<p>[461] See <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xiii. 560. I doubt whether this advertisement be from Johnson’s hand. It is very unlikely that he should make the advertiser in one and the same paragraph when speaking of himself use <i>us</i> and <i>mine</i>. Boswell does not mention the Preface to vol. iii. of the <i>Harkian Catalogue</i>. It is included in Johnson’s <i>Works</i> (v. 198). Its author, be he who he may, in speaking of literature, says:⁠—‘I have idly hoped to revive a taste well-nigh extinguished.’</p>
		<p>[462] Johnson did not speak equally well of Dr. James’s morals. ‘He will not,’ he wrote, ‘pay for three box tickets which he took. It is a strange fellow.’ The tickets were no doubt for Miss Williams’s benefit (Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, 8vo. p. 101). See <i>ante</i>, p. 81, and <i>post</i>, March 28, 1776, end of 1780, note.</p>
		<p>[463] See <i>post</i>, April 5, 1776.</p>
		<h5>[464] ‘TO DR. MEAD.</h5>
		<h5>‘SIR,</h5>
		<p>‘That the <i>Medicinal Dictionary</i> is dedicated to you, is to be imputed only to your reputation for superior skill in those sciences which I have endeavoured to explain and facilitate: and you are, therefore, to consider this address, if it be agreeable to you, as one of the rewards of merit; and if, otherwise, as one of the inconveniences of eminence.</p>
		<p>‘However you shall receive it, my design cannot be disappointed; because this publick appeal to your judgement will shew that I do not found my hopes of approbation upon the ignorance of my readers, and that I fear his censure least, whose knowledge is most extensive.</p>
		<p>‘I am, Sir,</p>
		<p>‘Your most obedient</p>
		<p>‘humble servant,</p>
		<h5>‘R. JAMES.’</h5>
		<p>BOSWELL. See <i>post</i>, May 16, 1778, where Johnson said, ‘Dr. Mead lived more in the broad sunshine of life than almost any man.’</p>
		<p>[465] Johnson was used to speak of him in this manner:⁠—‘Tom is a lively rogue; he remembers a great deal, and can tell many pleasant stories; but a pen is to Tom a torpedo, the touch of it benumbs his hand and his brain.’ Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 209. Goldsmith in his <i>Life of Nash</i> (Cunningham’s <i>Goldsmith’s Works</i>, iv. 54) says:⁠—‘Nash was not born a writer, for whatever humour he might have in conversation, he used to call a pen his torpedo; whenever he grasped it, it benumbed all his faculties.’ It is very likely that Nash borrowed this saying from Johnson. In Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 24, 1773, we read:⁠—Dr. Birch being mentioned, Dr. Johnson said he had more anecdotes than any man. I said, Percy had a great many; that he flowed with them like one of the brooks here. JOHNSON. “If Percy is like one of the brooks here, Birch was like the River Thames. Birch excelled Percy in that as much as Percy excels Goldsmith.” Disraeli (<i>Curiosities of Literature</i>, iii, 425) describes Dr. Birch as ‘one to whom British history stands more indebted than to any superior author. He has enriched the British Museum by thousands of the most authentic documents of genuine secret history.’</p>
		<p>[466] <i>Ante</i>, p. 140.</p>
		<p>[467] In 1761 Mr. John Levett was returned for Lichfield, but on petition was declared to be not duly elected (<i>Parl. Hist</i>. xv. 1088). Perhaps he was already aiming at public life.</p>
		<p>[468] One explanation may be found of Johnson’s intimacy with Savage and with other men of loose character. ‘He was,’ writes Hawkins, ‘one of the most quick-sighted men I ever knew in discovering the good and amiable qualities of others’ (Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 50). ‘He was,’ says Boswell (<i>post</i>, April 13, 1778), ‘willing to take men as they are, imperfect, and with a mixture of good and bad qualities.’ How intimate the two men were is shown by the following passage in Johnson’s <i>Life of Savage</i>:⁠—‘Savage left London in July, 1739, having taken leave with great tenderness of his friends, and parted from the author of this narrative with tears in his eyes.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 173.</p>
		<p>[469] As a specimen of his temper, I insert the following letter from him to a noble Lord, to whom he was under great obligations, but who, on account of his bad conduct, was obliged to discard him. The original was in the hands of the late Francis Cockayne Cust, Esq., one of His Majesty’s Counsel learned in the law:</p>
		<p>‘<i>Right Honourable</i> BRUTE, <i>and</i> BOOBY,</p>
		<p>‘I find you want (as Mr. ⸺ is pleased to hint,) to swear away my life, that is, the life of your creditor, because he asks you for a debt.⁠—The publick shall soon be acquainted with this, to judge whether you are not fitter to be an Irish Evidence, than to be an Irish Peer.⁠—I defy and despise you.</p>
		<p>‘I am,</p>
		<p>‘Your determined adversary,</p>
		<h5>‘R. S.’</h5>
		<p>BOSWELL. The noble Lord was no doubt Lord Tyrconnel. See Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 140. Mr. Cust is mentioned <i>post</i>, p. 170.</p>
		<p>[470] ‘Savage took all opportunities of conversing familiarly with those who were most conspicuous at that time for their power or their influence; he watched their looser moments, and examined their domestic behaviour with that acuteness which nature had given him, and which the uncommon variety of his life had contributed to increase, and that inquisitiveness which must always be produced in a vigorous mind by an absolute freedom from all pressing or domestic engagements.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 135.</p>
		<p>[471] ‘Thus he spent his time in mean expedients and tormenting suspense, living for the greatest part in the fear of prosecutions from his creditors, and consequently skulking in obscure parts of the town, of which he was no stranger to the remotest corners.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 165.</p>
		<p>[472] Sir John Hawkins gives the world to understand, that Johnson, ‘being an admirer of genteel manners, was captivated by the address and demeanour of Savage, who, as to his exterior, was, to a remarkable degree, accomplished.’ Hawkins’s <i>Life</i>, p. 52. But Sir John’s notions of gentility must appear somewhat ludicrous, from his stating the following circumstance as presumptive evidence that Savage was a good swordsman: ‘That he understood the exercise of a gentleman’s weapon, may be inferred from the use made of it in that rash encounter which is related in his life.’ The dexterity here alluded to was, that Savage, in a nocturnal fit of drunkenness, stabbed a man at a coffee-house, and killed him; for which he was tried at the Old-Bailey, and found guilty of murder.</p>
		<p>Johnson, indeed, describes him as having ‘a grave and manly deportment, a solemn dignity of mien; but which, upon a nearer acquaintance, softened into an engaging easiness of manners.’ [Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 187.] How highly Johnson admired him for that knowledge which he himself so much cultivated, and what kindness he entertained for him, appears from the following lines in the <i>Gentleman’s Magazine</i> for April, 1738, which I am assured were written by Johnson:</p>
		<p><i>‘Ad</i> RICARDUM SAVAGE.</p>
		<p>‘Humani studium generis cui pectore<br/>
		 fervet<br/>
		O colat humanum te foveatque<br/>
		 genus.’<br/></p>
		<p>BOSWELL. The epigram is inscribed Ad Ricardum Savage, Arm. Humani<br/>
		Generis Amatorem. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. viii. 210.<br/></p>
		<p>[473] The following striking proof of Johnson’s extreme indigence, when he published the <i>Life of Savage</i>, was communicated to the author, by Mr. Richard Stow, of Apsley, in Bedfordshire, from the information of Mr. Walter Harte, author of the <i>Life of Gustavus Adolphus</i>:</p>
		<p>‘Soon after Savage’s <i>Life</i> was published, Mr. Harte dined with Edward Cave, and occasionally praised it. Soon after, meeting him, Cave said, ‘You made a man very happy t’other day.’⁠—‘How could that be,’ says Harte; ‘nobody was there but ourselves.’ Cave answered, by reminding him that a plate of victuals was sent behind a screen, which was to Johnson, dressed so shabbily, that he did not choose to appear; but on hearing the conversation, was highly delighted with the encomiums on his book.’ MALONE. ‘He desired much to be alone, yet he always loved good talk, and often would get behind the screen to hear it.’ Great-Heart’s account of Fearing; <i>Pilgrim’s Progress</i>, Part II. Harte was tutor to Lord Chesterfield’s son. See <i>post</i>, 1770, in Dr. Maxwell’s <i>Collectanea</i>, and March 30, 1781.</p>
		<p>[474] ‘Johnson has told me that whole nights have been spent by him and Savage in a perambulation round the squares of Westminster, St. James’s in particular, when all the money they could both raise was less than sufficient to purchase for them the shelter and sordid comforts of a night’s cellar.’ Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, P. 53. Where was Mrs. Johnson living at this time? This perhaps was the time of which Johnson wrote, when, after telling of a silver cup which his mother had bought him, and marked SAM. I., he says:⁠—‘The cup was one of the last pieces of plate which dear Tetty sold in our distress.’ <i>Account of Johnson’s Early Life</i>, p. 18. Yet it is not easy to understand how, if there was a lodging for her, there was not one for him. She might have been living with friends. We have a statement by Hawkins (p. 89) that there was ‘a temporary separation of Johnson from his wife.’ He adds that, ‘while he was in a lodging in Fleet Street, she was harboured by a friend near the Tower.’ This separation, he insinuates, rose by an estrangement caused by Johnson’s ‘indifference in the discharge of the domestic virtues.’ It is far more likely that it rose from destitution.</p>
		<p>Shenstone, in a letter written in 1743, gives a curious account of the streets of London through which Johnson wandered. He says;⁠—‘London is really dangerous at this time; the pickpockets, formerly content with mere filching, make no scruple to knock people down with bludgeons in Fleet Street and the Strand, and that at no later hour than eight o’clock at night; but in the Piazzas, Covent Garden, they come in large bodies, armed with <i>couteaus</i>, and attack whole parties, so that the danger of coming out of the play-houses is of some weight in the opposite scale, when I am disposed to go to them oftener than I ought.’ Shenstone’s <i>Works</i> (edit.), iii. 73.</p>
		<p>[475] ‘Savage lodged as much by accident as he dined, and passed the night sometimes in mean houses,⁠ ⁠… and sometimes, when he had not money to support even the expenses of these receptacles, walked about the streets till he was weary, and lay down in the summer upon a bulk, or in the winter, with his associates in poverty, among the ashes of a glass-house. In this manner were passed those days and those nights which nature had enabled him to have employed in elevated speculations, useful studies, or pleasing conversation.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 159.</p>
		<p>[476] See <i>ante</i>, p. 94.</p>
		<p>[477] Cave was the purchaser of the copyright, and the following is a copy of Johnson’s receipt for the money:⁠—‘The 14th day of December, received of Mr. Ed. Cave the sum of fifteen guineas, in full, for compiling and writing <i>The Life of Richard Savage, Esq</i>., deceased; and in full for all materials thereto applied, and not found by the said Edward Cave. I say, received by me, SAM. JOHNSON. Dec. 14, 1743.’ WRIGHT. The title-page is as follows:⁠—‘An account of the Life of Mr. Richard Savage, son of the Earl Rivers. London. Printed for J. Roberts, in Warwick-Lane. MDCCXLIV. It reached a second edition in 1748, a third in 1767, and a fourth in 1769. A French translation was published in 1771.</p>
		<p>[478] Roberts published in 1745 Johnson’s <i>Observations on Macbeth</i>. See <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xv. 112, 224.</p>
		<p>[479] Horace, <i>Ars Poetica</i> l. 317.</p>
		<p>[480] In the autumn of 1752. Northcote’s <i>Reynolds</i> i. 52</p>
		<p>[481] <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>, 3rd ed. p. 35 [p. 55. Aug. 19, 1773]. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[482] ‘mint <i>of</i> ecstasy:’ Savage’s <i>Works</i> (1777), ii. 91.</p>
		<p>[483] ‘He lives to build, not boast a generous race: No tenth transmitter of a foolish face.’ <i>Ib</i>.</p>
		<p>[484] ‘<i>The Bastard</i>: A poem, inscribed with all due reverence to Mrs. Bret, once Countess of Macclesfield. By Richard Savage, son of the late Earl Rivers. London, printed for T. Worrall, 1728.’ Fol. first edition. P. CUNNINGHAM. Between Savage’s character, as drawn by Johnson, and Johnson himself there are many points of likeness. Each ‘always preserved a steady confidence in his own capacity,’ and of each it might be said:⁠—‘Whatever faults may be imputed to him, the virtue of suffering well cannot be denied him.’ Each ‘excelled in the arts of conversation and therefore willingly practised them.’ In Savage’s refusal to enter a house till some clothes had been taken away that had been left for him ‘with some neglect of ceremonies,’ we have the counterpart of Johnson’s throwing away the new pair of shoes that had been set at his door. Of Johnson the following lines are as true as of Savage:⁠—‘His distresses, however afflictive, never dejected him; in his lowest state he wanted not spirit to assert the natural dignity of wit, and was always ready to repress that insolence which the superiority of fortune incited;⁠ ⁠… he never admitted any gross familiarities, or submitted to be treated otherwise than as an equal.’ Of both men it might be said that ‘it was in no time of his life any part of his character to be the first of the company that desired to separate.’ Each ‘would prolong his conversation till midnight, without considering that business might require his friend’s application in the morning;’ and each could plead the same excuse that, ‘when he left his company, he was abandoned to gloomy reflections.’ Each had the same ‘accurate judgment,’ the same ‘quick apprehension,’ the same ‘tenacious memory.’ In reading such lines as the following who does not think, not of the man whose biography was written, but of the biographer himself?⁠—‘He had the peculiar felicity that his attention never deserted him; he was present to every object, and regardful of the most trifling occurrences⁠ ⁠… To this quality is to be imputed the extent of his knowledge, compared with the small time which he spent in visible endeavours to acquire it. He mingled in cursory conversation with the same steadiness of attention as others apply to a lecture.⁠ ⁠… His judgment was eminently exact both with regard to writings and to men. The knowledge of life was indeed his chief attainment.’ Of Johnson’s <i>London</i>, as of Savage’s <i>The Wanderer</i>, it might equally well be said:⁠—‘Nor can it without some degree of indignation and concern be told that he sold the copy for ten guineas.’</p>
		<p>[485] ‘Savage was now again abandoned to fortune without any other friend than Mr. Wilks; a man who, whatever were his abilities or skill as an actor, deserves at least to be remembered for his virtues, which are not often to be found in the world, and perhaps less often in his profession than in others. To be humane, generous, and candid is a very high degree of merit in any case, but those qualities deserve still greater praise when they are found in that condition which makes almost every other man, for whatever reason, contemptuous, insolent, petulant, selfish, and brutal.’ <i>Johnson’s Works</i>, viii. 107.</p>
		<p>[486] In his old age he wrote as he had written in the vigour of his manhood:⁠—‘To the censure of Collier⁠ ⁠… he [Dryden] makes little reply; being at the age of sixty-eight attentive to better things than the claps of a play-house.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i> vii. 295. See <i>post</i>, April 29, 1773, and Sept. 21, 1777.</p>
		<p>[487] Johnson, writing of the latter half of the seventeenth century, says:⁠—‘The playhouse was abhorred by the Puritans, and avoided by those who desired the character of seriousness or decency. A grave lawyer would have debased his dignity, and a young trader would have impaired his credit, by appearing in those mansions of dissolute licentiousness.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 270. The following lines in Churchill’s <i>Apology</i> (<i>Poems</i>, i. 65), published in 1761, shew how strong, even at that time, was the feeling against strolling players:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘The strolling tribe, a despicable race,<br/>
		Like wand’ring Arabs shift from place to place.<br/>
		Vagrants by law, to Justice open laid,<br/>
		They tremble, of the beadle’s lash afraid,<br/>
		And fawning cringe, for wretched means of life,<br/>
		To Madam May’ress, or his Worship’s Wife.’<br/></p>
		<p>[488] Johnson himself recognises the change in the public estimation:⁠—‘In Dryden’s time,’ he writes, ‘the drama was very far from that universal approbation which it has now obtained.’ <i>Works</i>, vii. 270.</p>
		<p>[489] Giffard was the manager of the theatre in Goodman’s Fields, where Garrick, on Oct. 19, 1741, made his first appearance before a London audience. Murphy’s <i>Garrick</i>, pp. 13, 16.</p>
		<p>[490] ‘Colonel Pennington said, Garrick sometimes failed in emphasis; as, for instance, in Hamlet,</p>
		<p>“I will speak <i>daggers</i> to her; but use <i>none</i>;”</p>
		<p>instead of</p>
		<p>“I will <i>speak</i> daggers to her; but <i>use</i> none.” ’</p>
		<p>Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 28, 1773.</p>
		<p>[491] I suspect Dr. Taylor was inaccurate in this statement. The emphasis should be equally upon <i>shalt</i> and <i>not</i>, as both concur to form the negative injunction; and <i>false witness</i>, like the other acts prohibited in the Decalogue, should not be marked by any peculiar emphasis, but only be distinctly enunciated. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[492] This character of the <i>Life of Savage</i> was not written by Fielding as has been supposed, but most probably by Ralph, who, as appears from the minutes of the partners of <i>The Champion</i>, in the possession of Mr. Reed of Staple Inn, succeeded Fielding in his share of the paper, before the date of that eulogium. BOSWELL. Ralph is mentioned in <i>The Dunciad</i>, iii. 165. A curious account of him is given in Benjamin Franklin’s <i>Memoirs</i>, i. 54⁠–⁠87 and 245.</p>
		<p>[493] The late Francis Cockayne Cust, Esq., one of his Majesty’s Counsel. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[494] Savage’s veracity was questioned, but with little reason; his accounts, though not indeed always the same, were generally consistent. ‘When he loved any man, he suppressed all his faults: and, when he had been offended by him, concealed all his virtues: but his characters were generally true so far as he proceeded; though it cannot be denied that his partiality might have sometimes the effect of falsehood.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 190.</p>
		<h5>[495] 1697. BOSWELL.</h5>
		<p>[496] Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 98.</p>
		<p>[497] The story on which Mr. Cust so much relies, that Savage was a supposititious child, not the son of Lord Rivers and Lady Macclesfield, but the offspring of a shoemaker, introduced in consequence of her real son’s death, was, without doubt, grounded on the circumstance of Lady Macclesfield having, in 1696, previously to the birth of Savage, had a daughter by the Earl Rivers, who died in her infancy; a fact which was proved in the course of the proceedings on Lord Macclesfield’s Bill of Divorce. Most fictions of this kind have some admixture of truth in them. MALONE. From <i>The Earl of Macclesfield’s Case</i>, it appears that ‘Anne, Countess of Macclesfield, under the name of Madam Smith, in Fox Court, near Brook Street, Holborn, was delivered of a male child on the 16th of January, 1696⁠–⁠7, who was baptized on the Monday following, the 18th, and registered by the name of Richard, the son of John Smith, by Mr. Burbridge; and, from the privacy, was supposed by Mr. Burbridge to be “a by-blow or bastard.” ’ It also appears, that during her delivery, the lady wore a mask; and that Mary Pegler, on the next day after the baptism, took a male child, whose mother was called Madam Smith, from the house of Mrs. Pheasant, in Fox Court [running from Brook Street in Gray’s Inn Lane], who went by the name of Mrs. Lee.</p>
		<p>Conformable to this statement is the entry in the register of St. Andrew’s, Holborn, which is as follows, and which unquestionably records the baptism of Richard Savage, to whom Lord Rivers gave his own Christian name, prefixed to the assumed surname of his mother:⁠—‘Jan. 1696⁠–⁠7. Richard, son of John Smith and Mary, in Fox Court, in Gray’s Inn Lane, baptized the 18th.’ BINDLEY. According to Johnson’s account Savage did not learn who his parents were till the death of his nurse, who had always treated him as her son. Among her papers he found some letters written by Lady Macclesfield’s mother proving his origin. Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 102. Why these letters were not laid before the public is not stated. Johnson was one of the least credulous of men, and he was convinced by Savage’s story. Horace Walpole, too, does not seem to have doubted it. Walpole’s <i>Letters</i>, i. cv.</p>
		<p>[498] Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 97.</p>
		<p>[499] <i>Ib</i>. p. 142.</p>
		<p>[500] Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, p. 101.</p>
		<p>[501] According to Johnson’s account (Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 102), the shoemaker under whom Savage was placed on trial as an apprentice was not the husband of his nurse.</p>
		<p>[502] He was in his tenth year when she died. ‘He had none to prosecute his claim, to shelter him from oppression, or call in law to the assistance of justice.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 99.</p>
		<p>[503] Johnson’s companion appears to have persuaded that lofty-minded man, that he resembled him in having a noble pride; for Johnson, after painting in strong colours the quarrel between Lord Tyrconnel and Savage, asserts that ‘the spirit of Mr. Savage, indeed, never suffered him to solicit a reconciliation: he returned reproach for reproach, and insult for insult.’ [<i>Ib</i>. p. 141.] But the respectable gentleman to whom I have alluded, has in his possession a letter, from Savage, after Lord Tyrconnel had discarded him, addressed to the Reverend Mr. Gilbert, his Lordship’s Chaplain, in which he requests him, in the humblest manner, to represent his case to the Viscount. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[504] ‘How loved, how honoured once avails thee not, To whom related, or by whom begot.’</p>
		<p>POPE’S <i>Elegy to the Memory of an Unfortunate Lady</i>.</p>
		<p>[505] Trusting to Savage’s information, Johnson represents this unhappy man’s being received as a companion by Lord Tyrconnel, and pensioned by his Lordship, as if posteriour to Savage’s conviction and pardon. But I am assured, that Savage had received the voluntary bounty of Lord Tyrconnel, and had been dismissed by him, long before the murder was committed, and that his Lordship was very instrumental in procuring Savage’s pardon, by his intercession with the Queen, through Lady Hertford. If, therefore, he had been desirous of preventing the publication by Savage, he would have left him to his fate. Indeed I must observe, that although Johnson mentions that Lord Tyrconnel’s patronage of Savage was ‘upon his promise to lay aside his design of exposing the cruelty of his mother,’ [Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 124], the great biographer has forgotten that he himself has mentioned, that Savage’s story had been told several years before in <i>The Plain Dealer</i>; from which he quotes this strong saying of the generous Sir Richard Steele, that ‘the inhumanity of his mother had given him a right to find every good man his father.’ [<i>Ib</i>. p. 104.] At the same time it must be acknowledged, that Lady Macclesfield and her relations might still wish that her story should not be brought into more conspicuous notice by the satirical pen of Savage. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[506] According to Johnson, she was at Bath when Savage’s poem of <i>The Bastard</i> was published. ‘She could not,’ he wrote, ‘enter the assembly-rooms or cross the walks without being saluted with some lines from <i>The Bastard</i>. This was perhaps the first time that she ever discovered a sense of shame, and on this occasion the power of wit was very conspicuous; the wretch who had without scruple proclaimed herself an adulteress, and who had first endeavoured to starve her son, then to transport him, and afterwards to hang him, was not able to bear the representation of her own conduct; but fled from reproach, though she felt no pain from guilt, and left Bath with the utmost haste to shelter herself among the crowds of London.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 141.</p>
		<p>[507] Miss Mason, after having forfeited the title of Lady Macclesfield by divorce, was married to Colonel Brett, and, it is said, was well known in all the polite circles. Colley Cibber, I am informed, had so high an opinion of her taste and judgement as to genteel life, and manners, that he submitted every scene of his <i>Careless Husband</i> to Mrs. Brett’s revisal and correction. Colonel Brett was reported to be too free in his gallantry with his Lady’s maid. Mrs. Brett came into a room one day in her own house, and found the Colonel and her maid both fast asleep in two chairs. She tied a white handkerchief round her husband’s neck, which was a sufficient proof that she had discovered his intrigue; but she never at any time took notice of it to him. This incident, as I am told, gave occasion to the well-wrought scene of Sir Charles and Lady Easy and Edging. BOSWELL. Lady Macclesfield died 1753, aged above 80. Her eldest daughter, by Col. Brett, was, for the few last months of his life, the mistress of George I, (Walpole’s <i>Reminiscences</i>, cv.) Her marriage ten years after her royal lover’s death is thus announced in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>., 1737:⁠—‘Sept. 17. Sir W. Leman, of Northall, Bart., to Miss Brett [Britt] of Bond Street, an heiress;’ and again next month⁠—‘Oct. 8. Sir William Leman, of Northall, Baronet, to Miss Brett, half sister to Mr. Savage, son to the late Earl Rivers;’ for the difference of date I know not how to account; but the second insertion was, no doubt, made by Savage to countenance his own pretensions. CROKER.</p>
		<p>[508] ‘Among the names of subscribers to the <i>Harleian Miscellany</i> there occurs that of “Sarah Johnson, bookseller in Lichfield.” ’ <i>Johnsoniana</i>, p. 466.</p>
		<p>[509] A brief account of Oldys is given in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. liv. 161, 260. Like so many of his fellows he was thrown into the Fleet. ‘After poor Oldys’s release, such was his affection for the place that he constantly spent his evenings there.’</p>
		<p>[510] In the Feb. number of the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for this year (p. 112) is the following advertisement:⁠—‘Speedily will be published (price 1s.) <i>Miscellaneous Observations on the Tragedy of Macbeth</i>, with remarks on Sir T.H.’s edition of <i>Shakespear</i>; to which is affix’d proposals for a new edition of <i>Shakespear</i>, with a specimen. Printed for J. Roberts in Warwick Lane.’ In the March number (p. 114), under the date of March 31, it is announced that it will be published on April 6. In spite of the two advertisements, and the title-page which agrees with the advertisements, I believe that the Proposals were not published till eleven years later (see <i>post</i>, end of 1756). I cannot hear of any copy of the <i>Miscellaneous Observations</i> which contains them. The advertisement is a third time repeated in the April number of the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for 1745 (p. 224), but the Proposals are not this time mentioned. Tom Davies the bookseller gives 1756 as the date of their publication (<i>Misc. and Fugitive Pieces</i>, ii. 87). Perhaps Johnson or the booksellers were discouraged by Hanmer’s <i>Shakespeare</i> as well as by Warburton’s. Johnson at the end of the <i>Miscellaneous Observations</i> says:⁠—‘After the foregoing pages were printed, the late edition of <i>Shakespeare</i> ascribed to Sir T. H. fell into my hands.’</p>
		<p>[511] ‘The excellence of the edition proved to be by no means proportionate to the arrogance of the editor.’ <i>Cambridge Shakespeare</i>, i. xxxiv.</p>
		<p>[512] ‘When you see Mr. Johnson pray [give] my compliments, and tell him I esteem him as a great genius⁠—quite lost both to himself and the world.’ <i>Gilbert Walmesley to Garrick</i>, Nov. 3, 1746. <i>Garrick Correspondence</i>, i. 45. Mr. Walmesley’s letter does not shew that Johnson was idle. The old man had expected great things from him. ‘I have great hopes,’ he had written in 1737 (see <i>ante</i>, p. 102), ‘that he will turn out a fine tragedy writer.’ In the nine years in which Johnson had been in town he had done, no doubt, much admirable work; but by his poem of <i>London</i> only was he known to the public. His <i>Life of Savage</i> did not bear his name. His <i>Observations on Macbeth</i> were published in April, 1745; his <i>Plan of the Dictionary</i> in 1747 [Transcriber’s note: Originally 1774, corrected in Errata.]. What was Johnson doing meanwhile? Boswell conjectures that he was engaged on his <i>Shakespeare</i> and his <i>Dictionary</i>. That he went on working at his <i>Shakespeare</i> when the prospect of publishing was so remote that he could not issue his proposals is very unlikely. That he had been for some time engaged on his <i>Dictionary</i> before he addressed Lord Chesterfield is shewn by the opening sentences of the <i>Plan</i>. Mr. Croker’s conjecture that he was absent or concealed on account of some difficulties which had arisen through the rebellion of 1745 is absurd. At no time of his life had he been an ardent Jacobite. ‘I have heard him declare,’ writes Boswell, ‘that if holding up his right hand would have secured victory at Culloden to Prince Charles’s army, he was not sure he would have held it up;’ <i>post</i>, July 14, 1763. ‘He had never in his life been in a nonjuring meeting-house;’ <i>post</i>, June 9, 1784.</p>
		<p>For the fact that he wrote very little, if indeed anything, in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. during these years more than one reason may be given. In the first place, public affairs take up an unusual amount of room in its columns. Thus in the number for Dec. 1745 we read:⁠—‘Our readers being too much alarmed by the present rebellion to relish with their usual delight the <i>Debates in the Senate of Lilliput</i> we shall postpone them for a season, that we may be able to furnish out a fuller entertainment of what we find to be more suitable to their present taste.’ In the Preface it is stated:⁠—‘We have sold more of our books than we desire for several months past, and are heartily sorry for the occasion of it, the present troubles.’ During these years then much less space was given to literature. But besides this, Johnson likely enough refused to write for the <i>Magazine</i> when it shewed itself strongly Hanoverian. He would highly disapprove of <i>A New Protestant Litany</i>, which was written after the following fashion:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘May Spaniards, or French, all who join with a Highland,<br/>
		In disturbing the peace of this our bless’d island,<br/>
		Meet tempests on sea and halters on dry land.<br/>
		 We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>Gent. Mag</i>. xv. 551.</p>
		<p>He would be disgusted the following year at seeing the Duke of Cumberland praised as ‘the greatest man alive’ (<i>Gent. Mag</i>. xvi. 235), and sung in verse that would have almost disgraced Cibber (p. 36). It is remarkable that there is no mention of Johnson’s <i>Plan of a Dictionary</i> in the <i>Magazine</i>. Perhaps some coolness had risen between him and Cave.</p>
		<p>[513] Boswell proceeds to mention six.</p>
		<p>[514] In Mrs. Williams’s Miscellanies, in which this paraphrase is inserted, it is stated that the Latin epitaph was written by Dr. Freind. I do not think that the English version is by Johnson. I should be sorry to ascribe to him such lines as:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Illustrious age! how bright thy glories shone,<br/>
		When Hanmer filled the chair⁠—and Anne the throne.’<br/></p>
		<p>[515] In the <i>Observations</i>, Johnson, writing of Hanmer, says:⁠—‘Surely the weapons of criticism ought not to be blunted against an editor who can imagine that he is restoring poetry while he is amusing himself with alterations like these:⁠—</p>
		<p>For⁠—This is the sergeant<br/>
		 Who like a good and hardy soldier fought;<br/>
		—This is the sergeant who<br/>
		 Like a <i>right</i> good and hardy soldier fought.<br/></p>
		<p>Such harmless industry may surely be forgiven, if it cannot be praised; may he therefore never want a monosyllable who can use it with such wonderful dexterity.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 93. In his Preface to <i>Shakespeare</i> published eighteen years later, he describes Hanmer as ‘A man, in my opinion, eminently qualified by nature for such studies.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 139. The editors of the <i>Cambridge Shakespeare</i> (i. xxxii) thus write of Hanmer:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘A country gentleman of great ingenuity and lively fancy, but with no knowledge of older literature, no taste for research, and no ear for the rhythm of earlier English verse, amused his leisure hours by scribbling down his own and his friend’s guesses in Pope’s <i>Shakespeare</i>.’</p>
		<p>[516] In the <i>Universal Visiter</i>, to which Johnson contributed, the mark which is affixed to some pieces unquestionably his, is also found subjoined to others, of which he certainly was not the author. The mark therefore will not ascertain the poems in question to have been written by him. They were probably the productions of Hawkesworth, who, it is believed, was afflicted with the gout. MALONE.</p>
		<p>It is most unlikely that Johnson wrote such poor poems as these. I shall not easily be persuaded that the following lines are his:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Love warbles in the vocal groves,<br/>
		 And vegetation paints the plain.’<br/></p>
		<p>‘And love and hate alike implore<br/>
		 The skies⁠—“That Stella mourn no more.” ’<br/></p>
		<p>‘The Winter’s Walk’ has two good lines, but these may have been supplied by Johnson. The lines to ‘Lyce, an elderly Lady,’ would, if written by him, have been taken as a satire on his wife.</p>
		<p>[517] See <i>post</i> under Sept. 18, 1783.</p>
		<p>[518] See Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 4, 34.</p>
		<p>[519] Boswell italicises <i>conceits</i> to shew that he is using it in the sense in which Johnson uses it in his criticism of Cowley:⁠—‘These conceits Addison calls mixed wit; that is, wit which consists of thoughts true in one sense of the expression and false in the other.’ <i>Ib</i>. vii 35.</p>
		<p>[520] <i>Namby Pamby</i> was the name given to Ambrose Philips by Pope <i>Ib</i>. viii. 395</p>
		<p>[521] Malone most likely is meant. Mr. Croker says:⁠—‘Johnson has “<i>indifferently</i>” in the sense of “<i>without concern</i>” in his <i>Dictionary</i>, with this example from <i>Shakespeare</i>, “And I will look on death indifferently.” ’ Johnson however here defines indifferently as <i>in a neutral state; without wish or aversion</i>; which is not the same as <i>without concern</i>. The passage, which is from <i>Julius Caesar</i>, i. 2, is not correctly given. It is⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Set honour in one eye and death i’ the other And I will look on both indifferently.’</p>
		<p>We may compare Johnson’s use of <i>indifferent</i> in his Letter to Chesterfield, <i>post</i>, Feb. 7, 1755:⁠—‘The notice which you have been pleased to take of my labours⁠ ⁠… has been delayed till I am indifferent, and cannot enjoy it.’</p>
		<p>[522] ‘Radcliffe, when quite a boy, had been engaged in the rebellion of 1715, and being attainted had escaped from Newgate.⁠ ⁠… During the insurrection [of 1745], having been captured on board a French vessel bound for Scotland, he was arraigned on his original sentence which had slumbered so long. The only trial now conceded to him was confined to his identity. For such a course there was no precedent, except in the case of Sir Walter Raleigh, which had brought shame upon the reign of James I.’ Campbell’s <i>Chancellors</i> (edit. 1846), v. 108. Campbell adds, ‘his execution, I think, reflects great disgrace upon Lord Hardwicke [the Lord Chancellor].’</p>
		<p>[523] In the original <i>end</i>.</p>
		<p>[524] “These verses are somewhat too severe on the extraordinary person who is the chief figure in them, for he was undoubtedly brave. His pleasantry during his solemn trial (in which, by the way, I have heard Mr. David Hume observe, that we have one of the very few speeches of Mr. Murray, now Earl of Mansfield, authentically given) was very remarkable. When asked if he had any questions to put to Sir Everard Fawkener, who was one of the strongest witnesses against him, he answered, ‘I only wish him joy of his young wife.’ And after sentence of death, in the horrible terms in cases of treason, was pronounced upon him, and he was retiring from the bar, he said, ‘Fare you well, my Lords, we shall not all meet again in one place.’ He behaved with perfect composure at his execution, and called out ‘<i>Dulce et decorum est pro patriâ mori</i>?’</p>
		<p>‘What joys, what glories round him wait,<br/>
		Who bravely for his country dies!”<br/></p>
		<p>FRANCIS. Horace, <i>Odes</i>, iii.2. 13.</p>
		<h5>BOSWELL.</h5>
		<p>‘Old Lovat was beheaded yesterday,’ wrote Horace Walpole on April 10, 1747, ‘and died extremely well: without passion, affectation, buffoonery, or timidity; his behaviour was natural and intrepid.’ <i>Letters</i>, ii. 77.</p>
		<p>[525] See <i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton’s <i>Collection</i>.</p>
		<p>[526] My friend, Mr. Courtenay, whose eulogy on Johnson’s Latin Poetry has been inserted in this Work [<i>ante</i>, p. 62], is no less happy in praising his English Poetry.</p>
		<p>But hark, he sings! the strain ev’n Pope admires;<br/>
		Indignant virtue her own bard inspires.<br/>
		Sublime as juvenal he pours his lays,<br/>
		And with the Roman shares congenial praise;⁠—<br/>
		In glowing numbers now he fires the age,<br/>
		And Shakspeare’s sun relumes the clouded stage.<br/></p>
		<h5>BOSWELL.</h5>
		<p>[527] The play is by Ambrose Philips. ‘It was concluded with the most successful Epilogue that was ever yet spoken on the English theatre. The three first nights it was recited twice; and not only continued to be demanded through the run, as it is termed, of the play; but, whenever it is recalled to the stage, where by peculiar fortune, though a copy from the French, it yet keeps its place, the Epilogue is still expected, and is still spoken.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 389. See <i>post</i>, April 21, 1773, note on Eustace Budgel. The Epilogue is given in vol. v. p. 228 of Bonn’s <i>Addison</i>, and the great success that it met with is described in <i>The Spectator</i>, No. 341.</p>
		<p>[528] Such poor stuff as the following is certainly not by Johnson:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Let musick sound the voice of joy!<br/>
		 Or mirth repeat the jocund tale;<br/>
		Let Love his wanton wiles employ,<br/>
		 And o’er the season wine prevail.’<br/></p>
		<p>[529] ‘Dodsley first mentioned to me the scheme of an English Dictionary; but I had long thought of it.’ <i>Post</i>, Oct. 10, 1779.</p>
		<p>[530] It would seem from the passage to which Boswell refers that Pope had wished that Johnson should undertake the <i>Dictionary</i>. Johnson, in mentioning Pope, says:⁠—‘Of whom I may be justified in affirming that were he still alive, solicitous as he was for the success of this work, he would not be displeased that I have undertaken it.’ <i>Works</i>, v. 20. As Pope died on May 30, 1744, this renders it likely that the work was begun earlier than Boswell thought.</p>
		<p>[531] In the title-page of the first edition after the name of Hirch comes that of L. Hawes.</p>
		<p>[532] ‘During the progress of the work he had received at different times the amount of his contract; and when his receipts were produced to him at a tavern-dinner given by the booksellers, it appeared that he had been paid a hundred pounds and upwards more than his due.’ Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>. p. 78. See <i>post</i>, beginning of 1756.</p>
		<p>[533] ‘The truth is, that the several situations which I have been in having made me long the <i>plastron</i> [butt] of dedications, I am become as callous to flattery as some people are to abuse.’ Lord Chesterfield, date of Dec. 15, 1755; Chesterfield’s <i>Misc. Works</i>, iv. 266.</p>
		<p>[534] September 22, 1777, going from Ashbourne in Derbyshire, to see Islam. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[535] Boswell here says too much, as the following passages in the <i>Plan</i> prove:⁠—‘Who upon this survey can forbear to wish that these fundamental atoms of our speech might obtain the firmness and immutability of the primogenial and constituent particles of matter?’ ‘Those translators who, for want of understanding the characteristical difference of tongues, have formed a chaotick dialect of heterogeneous phrases;’ ‘In one part refinement will be subtilised beyond exactness, and evidence dilated in another beyond perspicuity.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 12, 21, 22.</p>
		<p>[536] Ausonius, <i>Epigram</i> i. 12.</p>
		<p>[537] Whitehead in 1757 succeeded Colley Cibber as poet-laureate, and dying in 1785 was followed by Thomas Warton. From Warton the line of succession is Pye, Southey, Wordsworth, Tennyson. See <i>post</i>, under June 13, 1763.</p>
		<p>[538] Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 176) likewise says that the manuscript passed through Whitehead and ‘other hands’ before it reached Chesterfield. Mr. Croker had seen ‘a draft of the prospectus carefully written by an amanuensis, but signed in great form by Johnson’s own hand. It was evidently that which was laid before Lord Chesterfield. Some useful remarks are made in his lordship’s hand, and some in another. Johnson adopted all these suggestions.’</p>
		<p>[539] This poor piece of criticism confirms what Johnson said of Lord Orrery:⁠—‘He grasped at more than his abilities could reach; tried to pass for a better talker, a better writer, and a better thinker that he was.’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 22, 1773. See <i>post</i>, under April 7, 1778.</p>
		<p>[540] Birch, <i>MSS. Brit. Mus</i>. 4303. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[541] ‘When I survey the <i>Plan</i> which I have laid before you, I cannot, my Lord, but confess that I am frighted at its extent, and, like the soldiers of Cæsar, look on Britain as a new world, which it is almost madness to invade.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 21.</p>
		<p>[542] There might be applied to him what he said of Pope:⁠—“Self-confidence is the first requisite to great undertakings. He, indeed, who forms his opinion of himself in solitude without knowing the powers of other men, is very liable to error; but it was the felicity of Pope to rate himself at his real value.” Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii, 237.</p>
		<p>[543] ‘For the Teutonick etymologies I am commonly indebted to Junius and Skinner.⁠ ⁠… Junius appears to have excelled in extent of learning and Skinner in rectitude of understanding.⁠ ⁠… Skinner is often ignorant, but never ridiculous: Junius is always full of knowledge, but his variety distracts his judgment, and his learning is very frequently disgraced by his absurdities.’ <i>Ib</i>. v. 29. Francis Junius the younger was born at Heidelberg in 1589, and died at Windsor, at the house of his nephew Isaac Vossius, in 1678. His <i>Etymologicum Anglicanum</i> was not published till 1743. Stephen Skinner, M.D., was born in 1623, and died in 1667. His <i>Etymologicon Linguæ Anglicanæ</i> was published in 1671. Knight’s <i>Eng. Cycle</i>.</p>
		<p>[544] Thomas Richards published in 1753 <i>Antiquæ Linguæ Britannicæ Thesaurus</i>, to which is prefixed a <i>Welsh Grammar</i> and a collection of British proverbs.</p>
		<p>[545] See Sir John Hawkins’s <i>Life of Johnson</i> [p. 171], BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[546] ‘The faults of the book resolve themselves, for the most part, into one great fault. Johnson was a wretched etymologist.’ Macaulay’s <i>Misc. Writings</i>, p. 382. See <i>post</i>, May 13, 1778, for mention of Horne Tooke’s criticism of Johnson’s etymologies.</p>
		<p>[547] ‘The etymology, so far as it is yet known, was easily found in the volumes where it is particularly and professedly delivered⁠ ⁠… But to COLLECT the WORDS of our language was a task of greater difficulty: the deficiency of dictionaries was immediately apparent; and when they were exhausted, what was yet wanting must be sought by fortuitous and unguided excursions into books, and gleaned as industry should find, or chance should offer it, in the boundless chaos of a living speech.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 31.</p>
		<p>[548] See <i>post</i>, under April 10, 1776. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[549] ‘Mr. Macbean,’ said Johnson in 1778, ‘is a man of great learning, and for his learning I respect him, and I wish to serve him. He knows many languages, and knows them well; but he knows nothing of life. I advised him to write a geographical dictionary; but I have lost all hopes of his ever doing anything properly, since I found he gave as much labour to Capua as to Rome.’ Mme. D’Arblay’s <i>Diary</i>, i, 114. See <i>post</i> beginning of 1773, and Oct 24, 1780.</p>
		<p>[550] Boswell is speaking of the book published under the name of <i>Cibber</i> mentioned above, but ‘entirely compiled,’ according to Johnson, by Shiels. See <i>post</i>, April 10, 1776.</p>
		<p>[551] See <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 312, and <i>post</i>, May 21, 1775, note.</p>
		<p>[552] ‘We ourselves, not without labour and risk, lately discovered Gough Square⁠ ⁠… and on the second day of search the very House there, wherein the <i>English Dictionary</i> was composed. It is the first or corner house on the right hand, as you enter through the arched way from the North-west⁠ ⁠… It is a stout, old-fashioned, oak-balustraded house: “I have spent many a pound and penny on it since then,” said the worthy Landlord: “here, you see, this bedroom was the Doctor’s study; that was the garden” (a plot of delved ground somewhat larger than a bed-quilt) “where he walked for exercise; these three garret bedrooms” (where his three [six] copyists sat and wrote) “were the place he kept his⁠—<i>pupils</i> in”: <i>Tempus edax rerum!</i> Yet <i>ferax</i> also: for our friend now added, with a wistful look, which strove to seem merely historical: “I let it all in lodgings, to respectable gentlemen; by the quarter or the month; it’s all one to me.”⁠—“To me also,” whispered the ghost of Samuel, as we went pensively our ways.’ Carlyle’s <i>Miscellanies</i>, edit, of 1872, iv. 112.</p>
		<p>[553] Boswell’s account of the manner in which Johnson compiled his <i>Dictionary</i> is confused and erroneous. He began his task (as he himself expressly described to me), by devoting his first care to a diligent perusal of all such English writers as were most correct in their language, and under every sentence which he meant to quote he drew a line, and noted in the margin the first letter of the word under which it was to occur. He then delivered these books to his clerks, who transcribed each sentence on a separate slip of paper, and arranged the same under the word referred to. By these means he collected the several words and their different significations; and when the whole arrangement was alphabetically formed, he gave the definitions of their meanings, and collected their etymologies from Skinner, Junius, and other writers on the subject. PERCY.</p>
		<p>[554] ‘The books he used for this purpose were what he had in his own collection, a copious but a miserably ragged one, and all such as he could borrow; which latter, if ever they came back to those that lent them, were so defaced as to be scarce worth owning, and yet some of his friends were glad to receive and entertain them as curiosities.’ Hawkins, p. 175.</p>
		<p>[555] In the copy that he thus marked of Sir Matthew Hale’s <i>Primitive Origination of Mankind</i>, opposite the passage where it is stated, that ‘Averroes says that if the world were not eternal⁠ ⁠… it could never have been at all, because an eternal duration must necessarily have anteceded the first production of the world,’ he has written:⁠—‘This argument will hold good equally against the writing that I now write.’</p>
		<p>[556] Boswell must mean ‘whose writings <i>taken as a whole</i> had a tendency,’ <abbr>etc.</abbr> Johnson quotes Dryden, and of Dryden he says:⁠—‘Of the mind that can trade in corruption, and can deliberately pollute itself with ideal wickedness for the sake of spreading the contagion in society, I wish not to conceal or excuse the depravity. Such degradation of the dignity of genius, such abuse of superlative abilities, cannot be contemplated but with grief and indignation. What consolation can be had Dryden has afforded by living to repent, and to testify his repentance.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 293. He quotes Congreve, and of Congreve he says: ‘It is acknowledged, with universal conviction, that the perusal of his works will make no man better; and that their ultimate effect is to represent pleasure in alliance with vice, and to relax those obligations by which life ought to be regulated.’ <i>Ib</i>. viii. 28. He would not quote Dr. Clarke, much as he admired him, because he was not sound upon the doctrine of the Trinity. <i>Post</i>, Dec., 1784, note.</p>
		<p>[557] In the <i>Plan to the Dictionary</i>, written in 1747, he describes his task as one that ‘may be successfully performed without any higher quality than that of bearing burdens with dull patience, and beating the track of the alphabet with sluggish resolution.’ <i>Works</i>, v. 1. In 1751, in the <i>Rambler</i>, No. 141, he thus pleasantly touches on his work: ‘The task of every other slave [except the ‘wit’] has an end. The rower in time reaches the port; the lexicographer at last finds the conclusion of his alphabet.’ On April 15, 1755, he writes to his friend Hector:⁠—‘I wish, come of wishes what will, that my work may please you, as much as it now and then pleased me, for I did not find dictionary making so very unpleasant as it may be thought.’ <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S. 111, 301. He told Dr. Blacklock that ‘it was easier to him to write poetry than to compose his <i>Dictionary</i>. His mind was less on the stretch in doing the one than the other.’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 17, 1773.</p>
		<p>[558] The well-known picture of the company at Tunbridge Wells in Aug. 1748, with the references in Richardson’s own writing, is given as a frontispiece to vol. iii. of Richardson’s <i>Correspondence</i>. There can be no doubt that the figure marked by Richardson as Dr. Johnson is not Samuel Johnson, who did not receive a doctor’s degree till more than four years after Richardson’s death.</p>
		<p>[559] ‘Johnson hardly ever spoke of Bathurst without tears in his eyes.’ Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 56. Mrs. Piozzi, after recording an anecdote that he had related to her of his childhood, continues:⁠—‘ “I cannot imagine,” said he, “what makes me talk of myself to you so, for I really never mentioned this foolish story to anybody except Dr. Taylor, not even to my dear, dear Bathurst, whom I loved better than ever I loved any human creature; but poor Bathurst is dead!” Here a long pause and a few tears ensued.’ Piozzi’s <i>Anec</i>., p. 18. Another day he said to her:⁠—‘Dear Bathurst was a man to my very heart’s content: he hated a fool, and he hated a rogue, and he hated a Whig; he was a very good hater.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 83. In his <i>Meditations on Easter-Day</i>, 1764, he records:⁠—‘After sermon I recommended Tetty in a prayer by herself; and my father, mother, brother, and Bathurst in another.’ <i>Pr. and Med</i>., p. 54. See also <i>post</i>, under March 18, 1752, and 1780 in Mr. Langton’s <i>Collection</i>.</p>
		<p>[560] Of Hawkesworth Johnson thus wrote: ‘An account of Dr. Swift has been already collected, with great diligence and acuteness, by Dr. Hawkesworth, according to a scheme which I laid before him in the intimacy of our friendship. I cannot therefore be expected to say much of a life concerning which I had long since communicated my thoughts to a man capable of dignifying his narrations with so much elegance of language and force of sentiment.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 192. Hawkesworth was an imitator of Johnson’s style; <i>post</i>, under Jan. 1, 1753.</p>
		<p>[561] He was afterwards for several years Chairman of the Middlesex justices, and upon occasion of presenting an address to the King, accepted the usual offer of Knighthood. He is authour of ‘A History of Musick,’ in five volumes in quarto. By assiduous attendance upon Johnson in his last illness, he obtained the office of one of his executors; in consequence of which, the booksellers of London employed him to publish an edition of Dr. Johnson’s works, and to write his Life. BOSWELL. This description of Hawkins, as ‘Mr. John Hawkins, an attorney,’ is a reply to his description of Boswell as ‘Mr. James Boswell, a native of Scotland.’ Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 472. According to Miss Hawkins, ‘Boswell complained to her father of the manner in which he was described. Where was the offence? It was one of those which a complainant hardly dares to embody in words; he would only repeat, “Well, but <i>Mr. James Boswell</i>, surely, surely, <i>Mr. James Boswell</i>“ ’ Miss Hawkins’s <i>Memoirs</i>, i. 235. Boswell in thus styling Hawkins remembered no doubt Johnson’s sarcasm against attorneys. See <i>post</i>, 1770, in Dr. Maxwell’s <i>Collectanea</i>. Hawkins’s edition of <i>Johnson’s Works</i> was published in 1787⁠–⁠9, in 13 vols., 8vo., the last two vols. being edited by Stockdale. In vol. xi. is a collection of Johnson’s sayings, under the name of <i>Apothegms</i>, many of which I quote in my notes.</p>
		<p>[562] Boswell, it is clear, has taken his account of the club from Hawkins, who writes:⁠—‘Johnson had, in the winter of 1749, formed a club that met weekly at the King’s Head, a famous beef-steak house in Ivy Lane, near St. Paul’s, every Tuesday evening. Thither he constantly resorted with a disposition to please and be pleased. Our conversations seldom began till after a supper so very solid and substantial as led us to think that with him it was a dinner.</p>
		<p>‘By the help of this refection, and no other incentive to hilarity than lemonade, Johnson was in a short time after our assembling transformed into a new creature; his habitual melancholy and lassitude of spirit gave way; his countenance brightened.’ Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, pp. 219, 250. Other parts of Hawkins’s account do not agree with passages in Johnson’s letters to Mrs. Thrale written in 1783⁠–⁠4. ‘I dined about a fortnight ago with three old friends [Hawkins, Ryland, and Payne]; we had not met together for thirty years. In the thirty years two of our set have died.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 339. ‘We used to meet weekly about the year fifty.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 361. ‘The people whom I mentioned in my letter are the remnant of a little club that used to meet in Ivy Lane about three and thirty years ago, out of which we have lost Hawkesworth and Dyer, the rest are yet on this side the grave.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 363. Hawkins says the club broke up about 1756 (<i>Life</i>, p. 361). Johnson in the first of the passages says they had not met at all for thirty years⁠—that is to say, not since 1753; while in the last two passages he implies that their weekly meetings came to an end about 1751. I cannot understand moreover how, if Bathurst, ‘his beloved friend,’ belonged to the club, Johnson should have forgotten it. Bathurst died in the expedition to the Havannah about 1762. Two others of those given in Hawkins’s list were certainly dead by 1783. M’Ghie, who died while the club existed (<i>Ib</i>. p. 361), and Dr. Salter. A writer in the <i>Builder</i> (Dec. 1884) says, ‘The King’s Head was burnt down twenty-five years ago, but the cellarage remains beneath No. 4, Alldis’s dining-rooms, on the eastern side.’</p>
		<p>[563] Tom Tyers said that Johnson ‘in one night composed, after finishing an evening in Holborn, his <i>Hermit of Teneriffe</i>.’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for 1784, p. 901. The high value that he set on this piece may be accounted for in his own words. ‘Many causes may vitiate a writer’s judgment of his own works.⁠ ⁠… What has been produced without toilsome efforts is considered with delight, as a proof of vigorous faculties and fertile invention.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 110. He had said much the same thirty years earlier in <i>The Rambler</i> (No. 21).</p>
		<p>[564] ‘On January 9 was published, long wished, another satire from Juvenal, by the author of <i>London.’ Gent. Mag</i>. xviii. 598, 9.</p>
		<p>[565] Sir John Hawkins, with solemn inaccuracy, represents this poem as a consequence of the indifferent reception of his tragedy. But the fact is, that the poem was published on the 9th of January, and the tragedy was not acted till the 6th of the February following. BOSWELL. Hawkins perhaps implies what Boswell says that he represents; but if so, he implies it by denying it. Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 201.</p>
		<p>[566] ‘I wrote,’ he said, ‘the first seventy lines in <i>The Vanity of Human Wishes</i> in the course of one morning in that small house beyond the church at Hampstead.’ <i>Works</i> (1787), xi. 212.</p>
		<p>[567] See <i>post</i> under Feb. 15, 1766. That Johnson did not think that in hasty composition there is any great merit, is shewn by <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 169, entitled <i>Labour necessary to excellence</i>. There he describes ‘pride and indigence as the two great hasteners of modern poems.’ He continues:⁠—‘that no other method of attaining lasting praise [than <i>multa dies et multa litura</i>] has been yet discovered may be conjectured from the blotted manuscripts of Milton now remaining, and from the tardy emission of Pope’s compositions.’ He made many corrections for the later editions of his poem.</p>
		<p>[568] ‘Nov. 25, 1748. I received of Mr. Dodsley fifteen guineas, for which assign to him the right of copy of an imitation of the <i>Tenth Satire of Juvenal</i>, written by me; reserving to myself the right of printing one edition. SAM. JOHNSON.’</p>
		<p>‘London, 29 June, 1786. A true copy, from the original in Dr. Johnson’s handwriting. JAS. DODSLEY. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p><i>London</i> was sold at a shilling a copy. Johnson was paid at the rate of about 9⁠–⁠1/2_d_. a line for this poem; for <i>The Vanity of Human Wishes</i> at the rate of about 10_d_. a line. Dryden by his engagement with Jacob Tonson (see Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 298) undertook to furnish 10,000 verses at a little over 6_d_. a verse. Goldsmith was paid for <i>The Traveller</i> £21, or about 11⁠–⁠1/2_d_. a line.</p>
		<p>[569] He never published it. See <i>post</i> under Dec. 9, 1784.</p>
		<p>[570] ‘Jan. 9, 1821. Read Johnson’s <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i>⁠—all the examples and mode of giving them sublime, as well as the latter part, with the exception of an occasional couplet. I do not so much admire the opening. The first line, ‘Let observation,’ etc., is certainly heavy and useless. But ‘ ’tis a grand poem⁠—and so <i>true</i>!⁠—true as the Tenth of Juvenal himself. The lapse of ages changes all things⁠—time⁠—language⁠—the earth⁠—the bounds of the sea⁠—the stars of the sky, and everything “about, around, and underneath” man, <i>except man himself</i>. The infinite variety of lives conduct but to death, and the infinity of wishes lead but to disappointment.’ <i>Byron</i>, vol. v. p. 66. WRIGHT. Sir Walter Scott said ‘that he had more pleasure in reading <i>London</i>, and _The Vanity of Human Wishes _than any other poetical composition he could mention.’ Lockhart’s <i>Scott</i>, iii. 269. Mr. Lockhart adds that ‘the last line of MS. that Scott sent to the press was a quotation from <i>The Vanity of Human Wishes</i>.’ Of the first lines</p>
		<p>‘Let observation with extensive view<br/>
		Survey mankind from China to Peru,’<br/></p>
		<p>De Quincey quotes the criticism of some writer, who ‘contends with some reason that this is saying in effect:⁠—“Let observation with extensive observation observe mankind extensively.” ’ De Quincey’s <i>Works</i>, x. 72.</p>
		<p>[571] From Mr. Langton. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[572] In this poem one of the instances mentioned of unfortunate learned men is <i>Lydiat</i>:</p>
		<p>‘Hear Lydiat’s life, and Galileo’s end.’</p>
		<p>The history of Lydiat being little known, the following account of him may be acceptable to many of my readers. It appeared as a note in the Supplement to the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for 1748, in which some passages extracted from Johnson’s poem were inserted, and it should have been added in the subsequent editions.⁠—A very learned divine and mathematician, fellow of New College, Oxon, and Rector of Okerton, near Banbury. He wrote, among many others, a Latin treatise <i>De Natura call</i>, etc., in which he attacked the sentiments of Scaliger and Aristotle, not bearing to hear it urged, <i>that some things are true in philosophy and false in divinity</i>. He made above 600 Sermons on the harmony of the Evangelists. Being unsuccessful in publishing his works, he lay in the prison of Bocardo at Oxford, and in the King’s Bench, till Bishop Usher, Dr. Laud, Sir William Boswell, and Dr. Pink, released him by paying his debts. He petitioned King Charles I. to be sent into Ethiopia, etc., to procure MSS. Having spoken in favour of Monarchy and bishops, he was plundered by the parliament forces, and twice carried away prisoner from his rectory; and afterwards had not a shirt to shift him in three months, without he borrowed it, and died very poor in 1646. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[573] Psalm xc. 12.</p>
		<p>[574] In the original <i>Inquirer</i>.</p>
		<p>[575] ‘… nonumque prematur in annum.’ Horace, <i>Ars Poet</i>. l. 388.</p>
		<p>[576] ‘Of all authors,’ wrote Johnson, ‘those are the most wretched who exhibit their productions on the theatre, and who are to propitiate first the manager and then the public. Many an humble visitant have I followed to the doors of these lords of the drama, seen him touch the knocker with a shaking hand, and after long deliberation adventure to solicit entrance by a single knock.’ <i>Works</i>, v. 360.</p>
		<p>[577] Mahomet was, in fact, played by Mr. Barry, and Demetrius by Mr. Garrick: but probably at this time the parts were not yet cast. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[578] The expression used by Dr. Adams was ‘soothed.’ I should rather think the audience was <i>awed</i> by the extraordinary spirit and dignity of the following lines:</p>
		<p>‘Be this at least his praise, be this his pride,<br/>
		To force applause no modern arts are tried:<br/>
		Should partial catcalls all his hopes confound,<br/>
		He bids no trumpet quell the fatal sound;<br/>
		Should welcome sleep relieve the weary wit,<br/>
		He rolls no thunders o’er the drowsy pit;<br/>
		No snares to captivate the judgement spreads,<br/>
		Nor bribes your eyes to prejudice your heads.<br/>
		Unmov’d, though witlings sneer and rivals rail,<br/>
		Studious to please, yet not asham’d to fail,<br/>
		He scorns the meek address, the suppliant strain,<br/>
		With merit needless, and without it vain;<br/>
		In Reason, Nature, Truth, he dares to trust;<br/>
		Ye fops be silent, and ye wits be just!’<br/></p>
		<h5>BOSWELL.</h5>
		<p>[579] Johnson said of Mrs. Pritchard’s playing in general that ‘it was quite mechanical;’ <i>post</i>, April 7, 1775. See also <i>post</i> under Sept. 30, 1783.</p>
		<p>[580] ‘The strangling of Irene in the view of the audience was suggested by Mr. Garrick.’ Davies’s <i>Garrick</i>, i. 128. Dryden in his <i>Essay of Dramatick Poesie</i> (edit. 1701, i. 13), says:⁠—‘I have observed that in all our tragedies the audience cannot forbear laughing when the actors are to die; ‘ ’tis the most comick part of the whole play.’ ‘Suppose your Piece admitted, acted; one single ill-natured jest from the pit is sufficient to cancel all your labours.’ Goldsmith’s <i>Present State of Polite Learning</i>, chap. x.</p>
		<p>[581] In her last speech two of the seven lines are very bad:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Guilt and despair, pale spectres! grin around me,<br/>
		And stun me with the yellings of damnation!’<br/></p>
		<h5>Act v. sc. 9.</h5>
		<p>[582] Murphy referring to Boswell’s statement says:⁠—‘The Epilogue, we are told in a late publication, was written by Sir William Young. This is a new discovery, but by no means probable. When the appendages to a Dramatic Performance are not assigned to a friend, or an unknown hand, or a person of fashion, they are always supposed to be written by the author of the Play.’ Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 154. He overlooks altogether the statement in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. (xix. 85) that the Epilogue is ‘by another hand.’ Mr. Croker points out that the words ‘as Johnson informed me’ first appear in the second edition. The wonder is that Johnson accepted this Epilogue, which is a little coarse and a little profane. Yonge was Secretary at War in Walpole’s ministry. Walpole said of him ‘that nothing but Yonge’s character could keep down his parts, and nothing but his parts support his character.’ Horace Walpole’s <i>Letters</i>, i. 98, note.</p>
		<p>[583] I know not what Sir John Hawkins means by the <i>cold reception</i> of <i>Irene</i>. (See note, p. 192.) I was at the first representation, and most of the subsequent. It was much applauded the first night, particularly the speech on <i>to-morrow</i> [Act iii. sc. 2]. It ran nine nights at least. It did not indeed become a stock-play, but there was not the least opposition during the representation, except the first night in the last act, where Irene was to be strangled on the stage, which <i>John</i> could not bear, though a dramatick poet may stab or slay by hundreds. The bow-string was not a Christian nor an ancient Greek or Roman death. But this offence was removed after the first night, and Irene went off the stage to be strangled.⁠—BURNEY.</p>
		<p>[584] According to the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. (xix. 76) ‘it was acted from Monday, Feb. 6, to Monday, Feb. 20, inclusive.’ A letter in the <i>Garrick Corres</i>, (i. 32), dated April 3, 1745, seems to shew that so long a run was uncommon. The writer addressing Garrick says:⁠—‘You have now performed it [<i>Tancred</i>] for nine nights; consider the part, and whether nature can well support the frequent repetition of such shocks. Permit me to advise you to resolve not to act upon any account above three times a week.’ Yet against this may be set the following passage in the <i>Rambler</i>, No. l23:⁠—‘At last a malignant author, whose performance I had persecuted through the nine nights, wrote an epigram upon Tape the critic, which drove me from the pit for ever.’ Murphy writing in 1792 said that <i>Irene</i> had not been exhbited on any stage since its first representation. Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 52.</p>
		<p>[585] Mr. Croker says that ‘it appears by a MS. note in Isaac Reed’s copy of Murphy’s Life, that the receipts of the third, sixth, and ninth nights, after deducting sixty guineas a night for the expenses of the house, amounted to £195 17s.: Johnson cleared therefore, with the copyright, very nearly £300.’ <i>Irene</i> was sold at the price of 1s. 6d. a copy (<i>Gent. Mag</i>. xix. 96); so that Dodsley must have looked for a very large sale.</p>
		<p>[586] See <i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton’s <i>Collection</i> for Johnson’s estimate of <i>Irene</i> in later life.</p>
		<p>[587] Aaron Hill (vol. ii. p. 355), in a letter to Mr. Mallett, gives the following account of <i>Irene</i> after having seen it: ‘I was at the anomalous Mr. Johnson’s benefit, and found the play his proper representative; strong sense ungraced by sweetness or decorum.’ BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[588] See <i>ante</i>, p. 102</p>
		<p>[589] Murphy (<i>Life</i>, p. 53) says that some years afterwards, when he knew Johnson to be in distress, he asked Garrick why he did not produce another tragedy for his Lichfield friend? Garrick’s answer was remarkable: “When Johnson writes tragedy, declamation roars, and passion sleeps: when Shakespeare wrote; he dipped his pen in his own heart.” Johnson was perhaps aware of the causes of his failure as a tragedy-writer. In his criticism of Addison’s <i>Cato</i> he says: ‘Of <i>Cato</i> it has been not unjustly determined that it is rather a poem in dialogue than a drama, rather a succession of just sentiments in elegant language than a representation of natural affections, or any state probable or possible in human life⁠ ⁠… The events are expected without solicitude, and are remembered without joy or sorrow.⁠ ⁠… Its success has introduced or confirmed among us the use of dialogue too declamatory, of unaffecting elegance and chill philosophy.’ <i>Works</i>, vii. 456. ‘Johnson thought: <i>Cato</i> the best model of tragedy we had; yet he used to say, of all things the most ridiculous would be to see a girl cry at the representation of it.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i> (1787), xi. 207. <i>Cato</i>, if neglected, has added at least eight ‘habitual quotations’ to the language (see Thackeray’s <i>English Humourists</i>, p. 98). <i>Irene</i> has perhaps not added a single one. It has neverthingless some quotable lines, such as⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Crowds that hide a monarch from<br/>
		 himself.’ Act i. sc. 4.<br/>
		‘To cant⁠ ⁠… of reason to a lover.’<br/>
		 Act iii. sc. 1.<br/>
		‘When e’en as love was breaking<br/>
		 off from wonder,<br/>
		And tender accents quiver’d on my<br/>
		 lips.’ Ib.<br/>
		‘And fate lies crowded in a narrow<br/>
		 space.’ Act iii. sc. 6.<br/>
		‘Reflect that life and death, affecting<br/>
		 sounds,<br/>
		Are only varied modes of endless<br/>
		 being.’ Act ii. sc. 8.<br/>
		‘Directs the planets with a careless<br/>
		 nod.’ Ib.<br/>
		‘Far as futurity’s untravell’d waste.’<br/>
		 Act iv. sc. 1.<br/>
		‘And wake from ignorance the<br/>
		 western world.’ Act iv. sc. 2.<br/>
		‘Through hissing ages a proverbial<br/>
		 coward,<br/>
		The tale of women, and the scorn<br/>
		 of fools.’ Act iv. sc. 3.<br/>
		‘No records but the records of the<br/>
		 sky.’ Ib.<br/>
		‘… thou art sunk beneath reproach.’<br/>
		 Act v. sc. 2.<br/>
		‘Oh hide me from myself.’<br/>
		 Act v. sc. 3.<br/></p>
		<p>[590] Johnson wrote of Milton:⁠—‘I cannot but conceive him calm and confident, little disappointed, not at all dejected, relying on his own merit with steady consciousness, and waiting without impatience the vicissitudes of opinion, and the impartiality of a future generation.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 108.</p>
		<p>[591]</p>
		<p>‘Genus irritabile vatum.’<br/>
		‘The fretful tribe of rival poets.’<br/></p>
		<p>Francis, <i>Horace</i>, Ep. ii. 2. 102.</p>
		<p>[592] This deference he enforces in many passages in his writings; as for instance:⁠—‘Dryden might have observed, that what is good only because it pleases, cannot be pronounced good till it has been found to please.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 252. ‘The authority of Addison is great; yet the voice of the people, when to please the people is the purpose, deserves regard.’ <i>Ib</i>. 376. ‘About things on which the public thinks long, it commonly attains to think right.’ <i>Ib</i>. 456. ‘These apologies are always useless: “de gustibus non est disputandum;” men may be convinced, but they cannot be pleased against their will.’ <i>Ib</i>. viii. 26. ‘Of things that terminate in human life, the world is the proper judge; to despise its sentence, if it were possible, is not just; and if it were just, is not possible.’ <i>Ib</i>. viii. 316. Lord Chesterfield in writing to his son about his first appearance in the world said, ‘You will be tried and judged there, not as a boy, but as a man; and from that moment <i>there is no appeal for character</i>.’ Lord Chesterfield’s <i>Letters</i>, iii. 324. Addison in the <i>Guardian</i>, No. 98, had said that ‘men of the best sense are always diffident of their private judgment, till it receives a sanction from the public. <i>Provoco ad populum</i>, I appeal to the people, was the usual saying of a very excellent dramatic poet, when he had any disputes with particular persons about the justness and regularity of his productions.’ See <i>post</i>, March 23, 1783.</p>
		<p>[593] ‘Were I,’ he said, ‘to wear a laced or embroidered waistcoat, it should be very rich. I had once a very rich laced waistcoat, which I wore the first night of my tragedy.’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 27, 1773.</p>
		<p>[594] ‘Topham Beauclerc used to give a pleasant description of this greenroom finery, as related by the author himself: ‘But,’ said Johnson, with great gravity, ‘I soon laid aside my gold-laced hat, lest it should make me proud.’ Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 52. In <i>The Idler</i> (No. 62) we have an account of a man who had longed to ‘issue forth in all the splendour of embroidery.’ When his fine clothes were brought, ‘I felt myself obstructed,’ he wrote, ‘in the common intercourse of civility by an uneasy consciousness of my new appearance; as I thought myself more observed, I was more anxious about my mien and behaviour; and the mien which if formed by care is commonly ridiculous.’</p>
		<p>[595] See <i>ante</i>, p. 167.</p>
		<p>[596] See <i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton’s <i>Collection</i>.</p>
		<p>[597] <i>The Tatler</i> came to an end on Jan 2, 1710⁠–⁠1; the first series of <i>The Spectator</i> on Dec 6, 1712; and the second series of <i>The Spectator</i> on December 20, 1714.</p>
		<p>[598] ‘Two new designs have appeared about the middle of this month [March, 1750], one entitled, <i>The Tatler Revived; or The Christian Philosopher and Politician</i>, half a sheet, price 2_d_. (stamped); the other, <i>The Rambler</i>, three half sheets (un-stamped); price 2_d_.’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xx. 126.</p>
		<p>[599] Pope’s <i>Essay on Man</i>, ii. 10.</p>
		<p>[600] See <i>post</i>, under Oct. 12, 1779.</p>
		<p>[601] I have heard Dr. Warton mention, that he was at Mr. Robert Dodsley’s with the late Mr. Moore, and several of his friends, considering what should be the name of the periodical paper which Moore had undertaken. Garrick proposed <i>The Sallad</i>, which, by a curious coincidence, was afterwards applied to himself by Goldsmith:</p>
		<p>‘Our Garrick’s a sallad, for in him we see<br/>
		Oil, vinegar, sugar, and saltness agree!’<br/></p>
		<p>[<i>Retaliation</i>, line II.]</p>
		<p>At last, the company having separated, without any thing of which they approved having been offered, Dodsley himself thought of <i>The World</i>. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[602] In the original MS. ‘in this <i>my</i> undertaking,’ and below, ‘the salvation <i>both</i> of myself and others.’</p>
		<p>[603] Prayers and Meditations, p. 9. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[604] In the original folio edition of the <i>Rambler</i> the concluding paper is dated Saturday, March 17. But Saturday was in fact March 14. This circumstance is worth notice, for Mrs. Johnson died on the 17th. MALONE.</p>
		<p>[605] <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>, 3d edit. p. 28. [Aug. 16, 1773]. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[606] ‘Gray had a notion not very peculiar, that he could not write but at certain times, or at happy moments; a fantastic foppery, to which my kindness for a man of learning and virtue wishes him to have been superior.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 482. See <i>post</i>, under April 15, 1758.</p>
		<p>[607] Her correspondence with Richardson and Mrs. Carter was published in 1807.</p>
		<p>[608] The correspondence between her and Mrs. Carter was published in 1808.</p>
		<p>[609] Dr. Birch says:⁠—‘The proprietor of the <i>Rambler</i>, Cave, told me that copy was seldom sent to the press till late in the night before the day of publication,’ Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, p. 121, note. See <i>post</i>, April 12, 1776, and beginning of 1781.</p>
		<p>Johnson carefully revised the <i>Ramblers</i> for the collected edition. The editor of the Oxford edition of Johnson’s <i>Works</i> states (ii. x), that ‘the alterations exceeded six thousand.’ The following passage from the last number affords a good instance of this revision.</p>
		<p><i>First edition</i>.</p>
		<p>‘I have never complied with temporary curiosity, nor furnished my readers with abilities to discuss the topic of the day; I have seldom exemplified my assertions by living characters; from my papers therefore no man could hope either censures of his enemies or praises of himself, and they only could be expected to peruse them, whose passions left them leisure for the contemplation of abstracted truth, and whom virtue could please by her native dignity without the assistance of modish ornaments.’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxii. 117.</p>
		<p><i>Revised edition</i>.</p>
		<p>‘I have never complied with temporary curiosity, nor enabled my readers to discuss the topic of the day; I have rarely exemplified my assertions by living characters; in my papers no man could look for censures of his enemies, or praises of himself; and they only were expected to peruse them, whose passions left them leisure for abstracted truth, and whom virtue could please by its naked dignity.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, iii. 462.</p>
		<p>[610] ‘Such relicks [Milton’s early manuscripts] shew how excellence is acquired; what we hope ever to do with ease, we must learn first to do with diligence.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 119.</p>
		<p>[611] Of the first 52 <i>Ramblers</i> 49 were wholly by Johnson; of the last 156, 154. He seems to say that in the first 49, 17 were written from notes, and in the last 154 only 13.</p>
		<p>[612] No. 46.</p>
		<p>[613] Hawkins’s <i>Life of Johnson</i>, p. 268 [p. 265]. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[614] ‘The sly shadow steals away upon the dial, and the quickest eye can distinguish no more than that it is gone.’ Glanville, quoted in Johnson’s <i>Dictionary</i>.</p>
		<p>[615] This most beautiful image of the enchanting delusion of youthful prospect has not been used in any of Johnson’s essays. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[616] From Horace (<i>Ars Poet</i>. 1. 175) he takes his motto for the number:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Multa ferunt anni venientes commoda secum,<br/>
		Multa recedentes adimunt.’<br/>
		The blessings flowing in with life’s full tide<br/>
		Down with our ebb of life decreasing glide.’<br/></p>
		<h5>FRANCIS.</h5>
		<p>[617] Lib. xii. 96 [95]. ‘In Tuccam aemulum omnium suorum studiorum.’ MALONE.</p>
		<p>[618] ‘There never appear,’ says Swift, ‘more than five or six men of genius in an age; but if they were united, the world could not stand before them.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, iv. 18.</p>
		<p>[619] In the first edition this is printed [Greek: o philoi on philos]; in the second, [Greek: o philoi on philos]; in the ‘Corrections’ to the second, we find ‘for [Greek: o] read [Greek: oi];’ in the third it is printed as above. In three editions we have therefore five readings of the first word. See <i>post</i>, April 15, 1778, where Johnson says:</p>
		<p>‘An old Greek said, “He that has friends has no friend,” ’ and April 24, 1779, where he says: ‘Garrick had friends but no friend.’</p>
		<p>[620]</p>
		<p>‘gravesque<br/>
		 Principum amicitias.’<br/>
		‘And fatal friendships of the guilty<br/>
		 great.’<br/></p>
		<p>FRANCIS, Horace, <i>Odes</i>, ii. 1. 4.</p>
		<p>[621] 3 <i>Post</i>, under Jan. 1, 1753.</p>
		<p>[622] Sir John Hawkins has selected from this little collection of materials, what he calls the ‘Rudiments of two of the papers of the <i>Rambler</i>.’ But he has not been able to read the manuscript distinctly. Thus he writes, p. 266, ‘Sailor’s fate any mansion;’ whereas the original is ‘Sailor’s life my aversion.’ He has also transcribed the unappropriated hints on <i>Writers for bread</i>, in which he decyphers these notable passages, one in Latin, <i>fatui non famæ</i>, instead of <i>fami non famæ</i>; Johnson having in his mind what Thuanus says of the learned German antiquary and linguist, Xylander, who, he tells us, lived in such poverty, that he was supposed <i>fami non famæ scribere</i>; and another in French, <i>Degente de fate [fatu] et affamé a’argent</i>, instead of <i>Dégouté de fame</i>, (an old word for <i>renommée</i>) <i>et affamé d’argent</i>. The manuscript being written in an exceedingly small hand, is indeed very hard to read; but it would have been better to have left blanks than to write nonsense. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[623] When we know that of the 208 <i>Ramblers</i> all but five were written by Johnson, it is amusing to read a passage in one of Miss Talbot’s letters to Mrs. Carter, dated Oct. 20, 1750:⁠—‘Mr. Johnson would, I fear, be mortified to hear that people know a paper of his own by the sure mark of somewhat a little excessive, a little exaggerated in the expression.’ <i>Carter Corres</i>. i. 357.</p>
		<p>[624] The <i>Ramblers</i> certainly were little noticed at first. Smart, the poet, first mentioned them to me as excellent papers, before I had heard any one else speak of them. When I went into Norfolk, in the autumn of 1751, I found but one person, (the Rev. Mr. Squires, a man of learning, and a general purchaser of new books,) who knew anything of them. Before I left Norfolk in the year 1760, the <i>Ramblers</i> were in high favour among persons of learning and good taste. Others there were, devoid of both, who said that the <i>hard words</i> in the <i>Rambler</i> were used by the authour to render his <i>Dictionary</i> indispensably necessary. BURNEY. We have notices of the <i>Rambler</i> in the <i>Carter Corres</i>:⁠—‘May 28, 1750. The author ought to be cautioned not to use over many hard words. In yesterday’s paper (a very pretty one indeed) we had _equiponderant, and another so hard I cannot remember it [adscititious], both in one sentence.’ ‘Dec. 17, 1750:⁠—Mr. Cave complains of him for not admitting correspondents; this does mischief. In the main I think he is to be applauded for it. But why then does he not write now and then on the living manners of the times?’ In writing on April 22, 1752, just after the <i>Rambler</i> had come to an end, Miss Talbot says:⁠—‘Indeed ‘ ’tis a sad thing that such a paper should have met with discouragement from wise and learned and good people too. Many are the disputes it has cost me, and not once did I come off triumphant.’ Mrs. Carter replied:⁠—‘Many a battle have I too fought for him in the country, out with little success.’ Murphy says:⁠—‘of this excellent production the number sold on each day did not amount to five hundred; of course the bookseller, who paid the author four guineas a week, did not carry on a successful trade.’ Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 59.</p>
		<p>[625] Richardson wrote to Cave on Aug. 9, 1750, after forty-one numbers had appeared:⁠—‘I hope the world tastes them; for its own sake I hope the world tastes them. The author I can only guess at. There is but one man, I think, that could write them.’ <i>Rich. Corres</i>, i. 165. Cave replied:⁠—‘Mr. Johnson is the <i>Great Rambler</i>, being, as you observe, the only man who can furnish two such papers in a week, besides his other great business.’ He mentioned the recommendation it received from high quarters, and continued:⁠—‘Notwithstanding, whether the price of two-pence, or the unfavourable season of their first publication hinders the demand, no boast can be made of it.’ Johnson had not wished his name to be known. Cave says that ‘Mr. Carrick and others, who knew the author’s powers and style from the first, unadvisedly asserting their suspicions, overturned the scheme of secrecy.’ <i>Ib</i>. pp. 168⁠–⁠170.</p>
		<p>[626] Horace Walpole, while justifying George II. against ‘bookish men who have censured his neglect of literature,’ says:⁠—‘In truth, I believe King George would have preferred a guinea to a composition as perfect as <i>Alexander’s Feast.’ Reign of George II</i>, iii. 304.</p>
		<p>[627] ‘Dr. Johnson said to an acquaintance of mine, “My other works are wine and water; but my <i>Rambler</i> is pure wine.” ’ Rogers’s <i>Table Talk</i>, p. 10.</p>
		<p>[628] See <i>post</i>, April 5, 1772; April 19, 1773; and April 9, 1778.</p>
		<p>[629] It was executed in the printing-office of Sands, Murray, and Cochran, with uncommon elegance, upon writing-paper, of a duodecimo size, and with the greatest correctness; and Mr. Elphinston enriched it with translations of the mottos. When completed, it made eight handsome volumes. It is, unquestionably, the most accurate and beautiful edition of this work; and there being but a small impression, it is now become scarce, and sells at a very high price. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[630] Mr. Thomas Ruddiman, the learned grammarian of Scotland, well known for his various excellent works, and for his accurate editions of several authours. He was also a man of a most worthy private character. His zeal for the Royal House of Stuart did not render him less estimable in Dr. Johnson’s eye. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[631] In the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for Sept. 1750, and for Oct. 1752, translations of many of the mottoes were given; but in each number there are several of Elphinston’s. Johnson seems to speak of only one.</p>
		<p>[632] Writing to Miss Porter on July 12, 1749, he said:⁠—‘I was afraid your letter had brought me ill news of my mother, whose death is one of the few calamities on which I think with terror.’ Crokers <i>Boswell</i>, p. 62.</p>
		<p>[633] Mr. Strahan was Elphinston’s brother-in-law. <i>Post</i>, April 9, 1778.</p>
		<p>[634] In the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for January, 1752, in the list of books published is:⁠—‘A correct and beautiful edition of the Rambler in 4 volumes, in 12mo. Price 12s.’ The <i>Rambler</i> was not concluded till the following March. The remaining two volumes were published in July. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxii. 338.</p>
		<p>[635] According to Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, P. 269) each edition consisted of 1250 copies.</p>
		<p>[636] No. 55 [59.]. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[637] Miss Burney records in her Diary that one day at Streatham, while she and Mrs. Thrale ‘were reading this Rambler, Dr. Johnson came in. We told him what we were about. “Ah, madam!” cried he, “Goldsmith was not scrupulous; but he would have been a great man had he known the real value of his own internal resources.” ’ Mme. D’Arblay’s <i>Diary</i>, i. 83. See <i>post</i>, beginning of 1768.</p>
		<p>[638] It is possible that Mrs. Hardcastle’s drive in <i>She Stoops to Conquer</i> was suggested by the <i>Rambler</i>, No. 34. In it a young gentleman describes a lady’s terror on a coach journey. ‘Our whole conversation passed in dangers, and cares, and fears, and consolations, and stories of ladies dragged in the mire, forced to spend all the night on a heath, drowned in rivers, or burnt with lightning.⁠ ⁠… We had now a new scene of terror, every man we saw was a robber, and we were ordered sometimes to drive hard, lest a traveller whom we saw behind should overtake us; and sometimes to stop, lest we should come up to him who was passing before us. She alarmed many an honest man by begging him to spare her life as he passed by the coach.’</p>
		<p>[639] Dr. Johnson was gratified by seeing this selection, and wrote to Mr. Kearsley, bookseller in Fleet-Street, the following note:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Mr. Johnson sends compliments to Mr. Kearsley, and begs the favour of seeing him as soon as he can. Mr. Kearsley is desired to bring with him the last edition of what he has honoured with the name of BEAUTIES. May 20, 1782.’ BOSWELL. The correspondence, <i>post</i>, May 15, 1782, shews that Johnson sent for this book, not because he was gratified, but because he was accused, on the strength of one of the <i>Beauties</i>, of recommending suicide. On that day, being in the country, he wrote: ‘I never saw the book but by casual inspection, and considered myself as utterly disengaged from its consequences.’ He adds:⁠—‘I hope some time in the next week to have all rectified.’ The letter of May 20 shews that on his return to town he lost little time, if any, in sending for Kearsley.</p>
		<p>[640] See <i>post</i>, April 12, 1781.</p>
		<p>[641] Ecclesiastes vii. 4.</p>
		<p>[642] In the original ‘<i>separated sooner</i> than subdued.’ Johnson acted up to what he said. When he was close on his end, ‘all who saw him beheld and acknowledged the <i>invictum animum Catonis</i>⁠ ⁠… Talking of his illness he said:⁠—“I will be conquered; I will not capitulate.” ’ See <i>post</i>, Oct. 1784.</p>
		<p>[643] In the <i>Spectator</i>, No. 568, Addison tells of a village in which ‘there arose a current report that somebody had written a book against the ‘squire and the whole parish.’ The book was <i>The Whole Duty of Man</i>.</p>
		<p>[644] ‘The character of Prospero was, beyond all question, occasioned by Garrick’s ostentatious display of furniture and Dresden china.’ Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 144. If Garrick was aimed at, it is surprising that the severity of the satire did not bring to an end, not only all friendship, but even any acquaintance between the two men. The writer describes how he and Prospero had set out in the world together, and how for a long time they had assisted each other, till his friend had been lately raised to wealth by a lucky project. ‘I felt at his sudden shoot of success an honest and disinterested joy.’ Prospero reproached him with his neglect to visit him at his new house. When however he went to see him, he found that his friend’s impatience ‘arose not from any desire to communicate his happiness, but to enjoy his superiority.’ He was kept waiting at the door, and when at length he was shewn up stairs, he found the staircase carefully secured by mats from the pollution of his feet. Prospero led him into a backroom, where he told him he always breakfasted when he had not great company. After the visitor had endured one act of insolence after another, he says:⁠—‘I left him without any intention of seeing him again, unless some misfortune should restore his understanding.’ <i>Rambler</i>, No. 200. See <i>post</i>, May 15, 1776, where Johnson, speaking of the charge of meanness brought against Garrick, said, ‘he might have been much better attacked for living with more splendour than is suitable to a player.’</p>
		<p>[645] In C. C. Greville’s <i>Journal</i> (ii. 316) we have an instance how stories about Johnson grew. He writes:⁠—‘Lord Holland told some stories of Johnson and Garrick which he had heard from Kemble.⁠ ⁠… When Garrick was in the zenith of his popularity, and grown rich, and lived with the great, and while Johnson was yet obscure, the Doctor used to drink tea with him, and he would say, “Davy, I do not envy you your money nor your fine acquaintance, but I envy you your power of drinking such tea as this.” “Yes,” said Garrick, “it is very good tea, but it is not my best, nor that which I give to my Lord this and Sir somebody t’other.” ’ There can be little doubt that the whole story is founded on the following passage in the character of Prospero: ‘Breakfast was at last set, and, as I was not willing to indulge the peevishness that began to seize me, I commended the tea. Prospero then told me that another time I should taste his finest sort, but that he had only a very small quantity remaining, and reserved it for those whom he thought himself obliged to treat with particular respect.’ See <i>post</i>, April 10, 1778, where Johnson maintained that Garrick bore his good-fortune with modesty.</p>
		<p>[646] No 98.</p>
		<p>[647] Yet his style did not escape the harmless shafts of pleasant humour; for the ingenious Bonnell Thornton published a mock Rambler in the <i>Drury-lane Journal</i>. BOSWELL. Murphy (<i>Life</i>, p. 157), criticising the above quotation from Johnson, says:⁠—‘He forgot the observation of Dryden: “If too many foreign words are poured in upon us, it looks as if they were designed, not to assist the natives, but to conquer them.” ’</p>
		<p>[648] <i>Idler</i>, No. 70. BOSWELL. In the same number Johnson writes:⁠—‘Few faults of style, whether real or imaginary, excite the malignity of a more numerous class of readers than the use of hard words.⁠ ⁠… But words are hard only to those who do not understand them; and the critic ought always to inquire, whether he is incommoded by the fault of the writer or by his own. Every author does not write for every reader.’ See <i>post</i>, Sept. 19, 1777, where Johnson says:⁠—‘If Robertson’s style be faulty he owes it to me; that is, having too many words, and those too big ones.’</p>
		<p>[649] The following passages in Temple’s writings shew that a likeness may be discovered between his style and Johnson’s:⁠—‘There may be firmness and constancy of courage from tradition as well as of belief: nor, methinks, should any man know how to be a coward, that is brought up with the opinion, that all of his nation or city have ever been valiant.’ Temple’s <i>Works</i>, i. 167. ‘This is a disease too refined for this country and people, who are well, when they are not ill, and pleased, when they are not troubled; are content, because they think little of it; and seek their happiness in the common eases and commodities of life, or the increase of riches; not amusing themselves with the more speculative contrivances of passion, or refinements of pleasure.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 170. ‘They send abroad the best of their own butter into all parts, and buy the cheapest out of Ireland, or the north of England, for their own use. In short they furnish infinite luxury which they never practise, and traffic in pleasures which they never taste.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 195. See <i>post</i>, April 9, 1778, where Johnson says:⁠—‘Temple was the first writer who gave cadence to English prose.’</p>
		<p>[650] Dean Stanley calls Ephraim Chambers ‘the Father of Cyclopedias.’ <i>Memorials of Westminster Abbey</i>, p. 299, note. The epitaph which Chambers wrote for himself the Dean gives as:⁠—‘Multis pervulgatus, paucis notus, qui vitam inter lucem et umbram, nec eruditus nec idioticis literis deditus, transegit.’ In the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for 1740, p. 262, the last line is given, no doubt correctly, as:⁠—‘Nec eruditus nec idiota, literis deditus.’ The second edition of Chambers’s <i>Cyclopaedia</i> was published in 1738. There is no copy of his Proposal in the British Museum or Bodleian. The resemblance between his style and Johnson’s is not great. The following passage is the most Johnsonian that I could find:⁠—‘None of my predecessors can blame me for the use I have made of them; since it is their own avowed practice. It is a kind of privilege attached to the office of lexicographer; if not by any formal grant, yet by connivance at least. I have already assumed the bee for my device, and who ever brought an action of trover or trespass against that avowed free-booter? ‘ ’Tis vain to pretend anything of property in things of this nature. To offer our thoughts to the public, and yet pretend a right reserved therein to oneself, if it be not absurd, yet it is sordid. The words we speak, nay the breath we emit, is not more vague and common than our thoughts, when divulged in print.’ Chambers’s Preface, p. xxiii.</p>
		<p>[651] ‘There were giants in the earth in those days.’ <i>Gen</i>. vi. 4.</p>
		<p>[652] A GREAT PERSONAGE first appears in the second edition. In the first edition we merely find ‘by one whose authority,’ <abbr>etc.</abbr> Boswell in his <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 28, 1773, speaks of George III. as ‘a Great Personage.’ In his <i>Letter to the People of Scotland</i> (p. 90) he thus introduces an anecdote about the King⁠—and Paoli:⁠—‘I have one other circumstance to communicate; but it is of the highest value. I communicate it with a mixture of awe and fondness.⁠—That Great Personage, who is allowed by all to have the best <i>memory</i> of any man <i>born a Briton</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr> In the <i>Probationary Odes for the Laureateship</i>, published a few months after Boswell’s <i>Letter</i>, a ‘Great Personage’ is ludicrously introduced; pp. xxx. 63.</p>
		<p>[653] The first nine lines form the motto.</p>
		<p>[654] Horat. <i>Epist</i>. Lib. ii. Epist. ii. {1, 110} BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>But how severely with themselves proceed<br/>
		The men, who write such verse as we can read!<br/>
		Their own strict judges, not a word they spare<br/>
		That wants or force, or light, or weight, or care,<br/>
		Howe’er unwillingly it quits its place,<br/>
		Nay, though at court, perhaps, it may find grace:<br/>
		Such they’ll degrade; and some-times, in its stead,<br/>
		In downright charity revive the dead;<br/>
		Mark where a bold expressive phrase appears,<br/>
		Bright through the rubbish of some hundred years;<br/>
		Command old words that long have slept to wake,<br/>
		Words that wise Bacon or brave Rawleigh spake;<br/>
		Or bid the new be English, ages hence,<br/>
		(For use will father what’s begot by sense;)<br/>
		Pour the full tide of eloquence along,<br/>
		Serenely pure, and yet divinely strong,<br/>
		Rich with the treasures of each foreign tongue.’<br/></p>
		<p>Pope, <i>Imitations of Horace</i>, ii. 2. 157</p>
		<p>[655] ‘Horat. <i>De Arte Poetica</i>. [1. 48.] BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[656] See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 29, 1773, where Boswell says that up that date he had twice heard Johnson coin words, <i>peregrinity</i> and <i>depeditation</i>.</p>
		<p>[657] ‘The words which our authors have introduced by their knowledge of foreign languages, or ignorance of their own, by vanity or wantonness, by compliance with fashion or lust of innovation, I have registered as they occurred, though commonly only to censure them, and warn others against the folly of naturalizing useless foreigners to the injury of the natives.⁠ ⁠… Our language for almost a century has, by the concurrence of many causes, been gradually departing from its original Teutonick character, and deviating towards a Gallick structure and phraseology, from which it ought to be our endeavour to recall it, by making our ancient volumes the groundwork of style.⁠ ⁠… From the authors which rose in the time of Elizabeth a speech might be formed adequate to all the purposes of use and elegance.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. pp. 31, 39. See <i>post</i>. May 12, 1778.</p>
		<p>[658] If Johnson sometimes indulged his <i>Brownism</i> (see <i>post</i>, beginning of 1756), yet he saw much to censure in Browne’s style. ‘His style is, indeed, a tissue of many languages; a mixture of heterogeneous words, brought together from distant regions, with terms originally appropriated to one art, and drawn by violence into the service of another. He must however be confessed to have augmented our philosophical diction.⁠ ⁠… His innovations are sometimes pleasing, and his temerities happy.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 500. ‘It is remarkable that the pomp of diction, which has been objected to Johnson, was first assumed in the <i>Rambler</i>. His <i>Dictionary</i> was going on at the same time, and in the course of that work, as he grew familiar with technical and scholastic words, he thought that the bulk of his readers were equally learned; or at least would admire the splendour and dignity of the style.’ Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 156.</p>
		<p>‘The observation of his having imitated Sir Thomas Brown has been made by many people; and lately it has been insisted on, and illustrated by a variety of quotations from Brown, in one of the popular Essays written by the Reverend Mr. Knox [the Essay is No. xxii. of <i>Winter Evenings</i>, Knox’s <i>Works</i>, ii 397], master of Tumbridge school, whom I have set down in my list [<i>post</i>, under Dec. 6, 1784] of those who have sometimes not unsuccessfully imitated Dr. Johnson’s style. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[659] The following observation in Mr. Boswell’s <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i> [p. 9] may sufficiently account for that Gentleman’s being ‘now scarcely esteem’d a Scot’ by many of his countrymen:⁠—If he [Dr. Johnson] was particularly prejudiced against the Scots, it was because they were more in his way; because he thought their success in England rather exceeded the due proportion of their real merit; and because he could not but see in them that nationality which, I believe, no liberal-minded Scotchman will deny.’ Mr. Boswell, indeed, is so free from national prejudices, that he might with equal propriety have been described as⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Scarce by <i>South</i> Britons now<br/>
		 esteem’d a Scot.’<br/>
		 COURTENAY. BOSWELL.<br/></p>
		<p>[660] Malone says that ‘Baretti used sometimes to walk with Johnson through the streets at night, and occasionally entered into conversation with the unfortunate women who frequent them, for the sake of hearing their stories. It was from a history of one of these, which a girl told under a tree in the King’s Bench Walk in the Temple to Baretti and Johnson, that he formed the story of Misella in the <i>Rambler</i> [Nos. 170 and 171].’ Prior’s <i>Malone</i>, p. 161. ‘Of one [of these women] who was very handsome he asked, for what she thought God had given her so much beauty. She answered:⁠—“To please gentlemen.” ’ Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 321. See also <i>post</i>, under Dec. 2, 1784.</p>
		<p>[661] Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 270) had said that ‘the characteristics of Addison’s style are feebleness and inanity.’ He was thus happily ridiculed by Person:⁠—‘Soon after the publication of Sir John’s book, a parcel of Eton boys, not having the fear of God before their eyes, etc., instead of playing truant, robbing orchards, annoying poultry, or performing any other part of their school exercise, fell foul in print (see the <i>Microcosm</i>, No. 36) upon his Worship’s censure of Addison’s <i>middling</i> style.⁠ ⁠… But what can you expect, as Lord Kames justly observes, from a school where boys are taught to rob on the highway?’ Person, <i>Tracts</i>, p. 339.</p>
		<p>[662] <i>Works</i>, vii. 473.</p>
		<p>[663] When Johnson shewed me a proof-sheet of the character of Addison, in which he so highly extols his style, I could not help observing, that it had not been his own model, as no two styles could differ more from each other.⁠—‘Sir, Addison had his style, and I have mine.’⁠—When I ventured to ask him, whether the difference did not consist in this, that Addison’s style was full of idioms, colloquial phrases, and proverbs; and his own more strictly grammatical, and free from such phraseology and modes of speech as can never be literally translated or understood by foreigners; he allowed the discrimination to be just.⁠—Let any one who doubts it, try to translate one of Addison’s <i>Spectators</i> into Latin, French, or Italian; and though so easy, familiar, and elegant, to an Englishman, as to give the intellect no trouble; yet he would find the transfusion into another language extremely difficult, if not impossible. But a <i>Rambler</i>, <i>Adventurer</i>, or <i>Idler</i>, of Johnson, would fall into any classical or European language, as easily as if it had been originally conceived in it. BURNEY. Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 125) recounts how Johnson recommended Addison’s works as a model for imitation to Mr. Woodhouse, a poetical shoemaker. ‘ “Give nights and days, Sir, (said he) to the study of Addison, if you mean either to be a good writer, or, what is more worth, an honest man.” When I saw something like the same expression in his criticism on that author, I put him in mind of his past injunctions to the young poet, to which he replied, “That he wished the shoemaker might have remembered them as well.” ’ Yet he says in his <i>Life of Pope ( Works</i>, viii. 284), ‘He that has once studiously formed a style rarely writes afterwards with complete ease.’</p>
		<p>[664] I shall probably, in another work, maintain the merit of Addison’s poetry, which has been very unjustly depreciated. BOSWELL. He proposed also to publish an edition of Johnson’s poems (<i>ante</i>, p. 16), an account of his own travels (<i>post</i>, April 17, 1778), a collection, with notes, of old tenures and charters of Scotland (<i>post</i>, Oct. 27, 1779), and a History of James IV. of Scotland, ‘the patron,’ as he said, ‘of my family’ (Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 23, 1773).</p>
		<p>[665] Lewis thus happily translates the lines in <i>Martial</i>⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Diligat ilia senèm quondam: sed et ipsa marito,<br/>
		Tunc quoque cum fuerit, non videatur, anus.<br/>
		‘Wrinkled with age, may mutual love and truth<br/>
		To their dim eyes recall the bloom of youth.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>Rambler</i>, No. 167.</p>
		<p>Some of Johnson’s own translations are happy, as:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Quam juvat immites ventos audire cubantem<br/>
		Aut, gelidas hibernus aquas quum fuderit auster,<br/>
		Securum somnos, imbre juvante, sequi!<br/>
		‘How sweet in sleep to pass the careless hours,<br/>
		Lull’d by the beating winds and dashing show’rs.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>Ib</i>. No. 117.</p>
		<p>[666] [Greek: Augon ek makaron antaxios eiae amoibae.]</p>
		<p>‘Celestial powers! that piety regard,<br/>
		From you my labours wait their last reward.’<br/></p>
		<p>A modification of the Greek line is engraved on the scroll in Johnson’s monument in St. Paul’s (<i>post</i>, Dec. 1784).</p>
		<p>[667] ‘The essays professedly serious, if I have been able to execute my own intentions, will be found exactly conformable to the precepts of Christianity.⁠ ⁠… I therefore look back on this part of my work with pleasure, which no blame or praise of man shall diminish or augment.’ <i>Rambler</i>, No. 208.</p>
		<p>[668] I have little doubt that this attack on the concluding verse is an indirect blow at Hawkins, who had quoted the whole passage, and had clearly thought it the more ‘awful’ on account of the couplet. See Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 291.</p>
		<p>[669] In the original <i>Raleigh’s</i>.</p>
		<p>[670] The italics are Boswell’s.</p>
		<p>[671] Mrs. Williams is probably the person meant. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[672] ‘In 1750, April 5, <i>Comus</i> was played for her benefit. She had so little acquaintance with diversion or gaiety, that she did not know what was intended when a benefit was theatre was offered her. The profits of the night were only £130, though Dr. Newton brought a large contribution; and £20 were given by Tonson, a man who is to be praised as often as he is named.⁠ ⁠… This was the greatest benefaction that <i>Paradise Lost</i> ever procured the author’s descendants; and to this he who has now attempted to relate his life had the honour of contributing a Prologue.’ Johnson’s <i>Works, vii. 118</i>. In the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. (xx. 152) we read that, as on ‘April 4, the night first appointed, many in convenient circumstances happened to disappoint the hopes of success, the managers generously quitted the profits of another night, in which the theatre was expected to be fuller. Mr. Samuel Johnson’s prologue was afterwards printed for Mrs. Foster’s benefit.’</p>
		<p>[673] Johnson is thinking of Pope’s lines⁠—</p>
		<p>‘But still the great have kindness in reserve,<br/>
		He helped to bury whom he helped to starve.’<br/></p>
		<p>Prologue to the <i>Satires</i>, 1. 247. In the <i>Life of Milton</i> he writes:⁠—‘In our time a monument has been erected in Westminster Abbey <i>To the author of Paradise Lost</i> by Mr. Benson, who has in the inscription bestowed more words upon himself than upon Milton.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 112. Pope has a hit at Benson in the <i>Dunciad</i>, iii. 325:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘On poets’ tombs see Benson’s titles writ!’</p>
		<p>Moore, describing Sheridan’s funeral, says:⁠—‘It was well remarked by a French Journal, in contrasting the penury of Sheridan’s latter years with the splendour of his funeral, that “France is the place for a man of letters to live in, and England the place for him to die in.” ’ Moore himself wrote:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘How proud they can press to the funeral array<br/>
		Of him whom they shunned in his sickness and sorrow⁠—<br/>
		How bailiffs may seize his last blanket to-day,<br/>
		Whose pall shall be held up by Nobles to-morrow.’<br/></p>
		<p>Moore’s <i>Sheridan</i>, ii. 460⁠–⁠2.</p>
		<p>[674] Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, i. 115.</p>
		<p>[675] Among the advertisements in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for February of this year is the following:⁠—’<i>An elegy wrote in a country churchyard, 6d</i>.’</p>
		<p>[676] See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 17, 1773.</p>
		<p>[677] ‘Lest there should be any person, at any future period, absurd enough to suspect that Johnson was a partaker in Lauder’s fraud, or had any knowledge of it, when he assisted him with his masterly pen, it is proper here to quote the words of Dr. Douglas, now Bishop of Salisbury, at the time when he detected the imposition. ‘It is to be hoped, nay it is <i>expected</i>, that the elegant and nervous writer, whose judicious sentiments and inimitable style point out the authour of Lauder’s Preface and Postscript, will no longer allow one to <i>plume himself with his feathers</i>, who appeareth so little to deserve [his] assistance: an assistance which I am persuaded would never have been communicated, had there been the least suspicion of those facts which I have been the instrument of conveying to the world in these sheets.’ <i>Milton no Plagiary</i>, 2nd edit. p. 78. And his Lordship has been pleased now to authorise me to say, in the strongest manner, that there is no ground whatever for any unfavourable reflection against Dr. Johnson, who expressed the strongest indignation against Lauder. BOSWELL. To this letter Lauder had the impudence to add a shameless postscript and some ‘testimonies’ concerning himself. Though on the face of it it is evident that this postscript is not by Johnson, yet it is included in his works (v. 283). The letter was dated Dec. 20, 1750. In the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for the next month (xxi. 47) there is the following paragraph:⁠—‘Mr. Lauder confesses here and exhibits all his forgeries; for which he assigns one motive in the book, and after asking pardon assigns another in the postscript; he also takes an opportunity to publish several letters and testimonials to his former character.’ Goldsmith in Retaliation has a hit at Lauder:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Here Douglas retires from his toils to relax,<br/>
		The scourge of impostors, the terror of quacks.<br/>
		New Lauders and Bowers the Tweed shall cross over,<br/>
		No countryman living their tricks to discover.’<br/></p>
		<p>Dr. Douglas was afterwards Bishop of Salisbury (<i>ante</i>, p. 127). See <i>post</i>, June 25, 1763, for the part he took in exposing the Cock Lane Ghost imposture.</p>
		<p>[678] Scott writing to Southey in 1810 said:⁠—‘A witty rogue the other day, who sent me a letter signed Detector, proved me guilty of stealing a passage from one of Vida’s Latin poems, which I had never seen or heard of.’ The passage alleged to be stolen ends with⁠—</p>
		<p>‘When pain and anguish wring the brow,<br/>
		A ministering angel thou!’<br/></p>
		<p>which in Vida <i>ad Eranen. El</i>. ii. v. 21, ran⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Cum dolor atque supercilio gravis imminet angor,<br/>
		Fungeris angelico sola ministerio.’<br/></p>
		<p>‘It is almost needless to add,’ says Mr. Lockhart, ‘there are no such lines.’ <i>Life of Scott</i>, iii. 294.</p>
		<p>[679] The greater part of this Preface was given in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for August 1747 (xvii. 404).</p>
		<p>[680] ‘Persuasive’ is scarcely a fit description for this noble outburst of indignation on the part of one who knew all the miseries of poverty. After quoting Dr. Newton’s account of the distress to which Milton’s grand-daughter had been reduced, he says:⁠—‘That this relation is true cannot be questioned: but surely the honour of letters, the dignity of sacred poetry, the spirit of the English nation, and the glory of human nature require⁠—that it should be true no longer.⁠ ⁠… In an age, which amidst all its vices and all its follies has not become infamous for want of charity, it may be surely allowed to hope, that the living remains of Milton will be no longer suffered to languish in distress.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 270.</p>
		<p>[681] Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 275.</p>
		<p>[682] In the original <i>retrospection</i>. Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 268.</p>
		<p>[683] In this same year Johnson thus ends a severe criticism on <i>Samson Agonistes</i>: ‘The everlasting verdure of Milton’s laurels has nothing to fear from the blasts of malignity; nor can my attempt produce any other effect than to strengthen their shoots by lopping their luxuriance.’ <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 140. ‘Mr. Nichols shewed Johnson in 1780 a book called <i>Remarks on Johnson’s Life of Milton</i>, in which the affair of Lauder was renewed with virulence. He read the libellous passage with attention, and instantly wrote on the margin:⁠—“In the business of Lauder I was deceived; partly by thinking the man too frantic to be fraudulent.’ ” Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 66.</p>
		<p>[684] ‘Johnson turned his house,’ writes Lord Macaulay, ‘into a place of refuge for a crowd of wretched old creatures who could find no other asylum; nor could all their peevishness and ingratitude weary out his benevolence’ (<i>Essays</i>, i. 390). In his <i>Biography of Johnson</i> (p. 388) he says that Mrs. Williams’s ‘chief recommendations were her blindness and her poverty.’ No doubt in Johnson’s letters to Mrs. Thrale are found amusing accounts of the discord of the inmates of his house. But it is abundantly clear that in Mrs. Williams’s company he had for years found pleasure. A few months after her death he wrote to Mrs. Thrale: ‘You have more than once wondered at my complaint of solitude, when you hear that I am crowded with visits. <i>Inopem me copia fecit</i>. Visitors are no proper companions in the chamber of sickness.⁠ ⁠… The amusements and consolations of languor and depression are conferred by familiar and domestic companions.⁠ ⁠… Such society I had with Levett and Williams’ (<i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 341). To Mrs. Montagu he wrote:⁠—‘Thirty years and more she had been my companion, and her death has left me very desolate’ (Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, p. 739). Boswell says that ‘her departure left a blank in his house’ (<i>post</i>, Aug. 1783). ‘By her death,’ writes Murphy, ‘he was left in a state of destitution, with nobody but his black servant to soothe his anxious moments’ (Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 122). Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 558) says that ‘she had not only cheered him in his solitude, and helped him to pass with comfort those hours which otherwise would have been irksome to him, but had relieved him from domestic cares, regulated and watched over the expenses of his house, etc.’ ‘She had,’ as Boswell says (<i>post</i>, Aug. 1783), ‘valuable qualities.’ ‘Had she had,’ wrote Johnson, ‘good humour and prompt elocution, her universal curiosity and comprehensive knowledge would have made her the delight of all that knew her’ (<i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 311). To Langton he wrote:⁠—‘I have lost a companion to whom I have had recourse for domestic amusement for thirty years, and whose variety of knowledge never was exhausted’ (<i>post</i>, Sept. 29, 1783). ‘Her acquisitions,’ he wrote to Dr. Burney, ‘were many and her curiosity universal; so that she partook of every conversation’ (<i>post</i>, Sept. 1783). Murphy (<i>Life</i> p. 72) says:⁠—‘She possessed uncommon talents, and, though blind, had an alacrity of mind that made her conversation agreeable, and even desirable.’ According to Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, 322⁠–⁠4) ‘she had acquired a knowledge of French and Italian, and had made great improvements in literature. She was a woman of an enlightened understanding. Johnson in many exigencies found her an able counsellor, and seldom shewed his wisdom more than when he hearkened to her advice.’ Perhaps Johnson had her in his thoughts when, writing of Pope’s last years and Martha Blount, he said:⁠—‘Their acquaintance began early; the life of each was pictured on the other’s mind; their conversation therefore was endearing, for when they met there was an immediate coalition of congenial notions.’ (Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 304.) Miss Mulso (Mrs. Chapone) writing to Mrs. Carter in 1753, says:⁠—‘I was charmed with Mr. Johnson’s behaviour to Mrs. Williams, which was like that of a fond father to his daughter. She shewed very good sense, with a great deal of modesty and humility; and so much patience and cheerfulness under her misfortune that it doubled my concern for her’ (<i>Mrs. Chapone’s Life</i>, p. 73). Miss Talbot wrote to Mrs. Carter in 1756:⁠—‘My mother the other day fell in love with your friend, Mrs. Williams, whom we met at Mr. Richardson’s [where Miss Mulso also had met her], and is particularly charmed with the sweetness of her voice’ (Talbot and Carter <i>Corresp</i>. ii. 221). Miss Talbot was a niece of Lord Chancellor Talbot. Hannah More wrote in 1774:⁠—‘Mrs. Williams is engaging in her manners; her conversation lively and entertaining’ (More’s <i>Memoirs</i>, i.49). Boswell, however, more than once complains that she was ‘peevish’ (<i>post</i>, Oct. 26, 1769 and April 7, 1776). At a time when she was very ill, and had gone into the country to try if she could improve her health, Johnson wrote:⁠—‘Age, and sickness, and pride have made her so peevish, that I was forced to bribe the maid to stay with her by a secret stipulation of half-a-crown a week over her wages’ (<i>post</i>, July 22, 1777). Malone, in a note on August 2, 1763, says that he thinks she had of her own ‘about £35 or £40 a year.’ This was in her latter days; Johnson had prevailed on Garrick to give her a benefit and Mrs. Montagu to give her a pension. She used, he adds, to help in the house-work.</p>
		<p>[685] March 14. See <i>ante</i>, p. 203, note 1. He had grown weary of his work. In the last <i>Rambler</i> but one he wrote: ‘When once our labour has begun, the comfort that enables us to endure it is the prospect of its end.⁠ ⁠… He that is himself weary will soon weary the public. Let him therefore lay down his employment, whatever it be, who can no longer exert his former activity or attention; let him not endeavour to struggle with censure, or obstinately infest the stage, till a general hiss commands him to depart.’</p>
		<p>[686] How successful an imitator Hawkesworth was is shewn by the following passage in the Carter and Talbot <i>Corresp</i>., ii. 109:⁠—‘I discern Mr. Johnson through all the papers that are not marked A, as evidently as if I saw him through the keyhole with the pen in his hand.’</p>
		<p>[687] In the <i>Rambler</i> for Feb. 25 of this year (No. 203) he wrote in the following melancholy strain:⁠—‘Every period of life is obliged to borrow its happiness from the time to come. In youth we have nothing past to entertain us, and in age we derive little from retrospect but hopeless sorrow. Yet the future likewise has its limits which the imagination dreads to approach, but which we see to be not far distant. The loss of our friends and companions impresses hourly upon us the necessity of our own departure; we know that the schemes of man are quickly at an end, that we must soon lie down in the grave with the forgotten multitudes of former ages, and yield our place to others, who, like us, shall be driven a while by hope or fear about the surface of the earth, and then like us be lost in the shades of death.’ In <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, pp. 12⁠–⁠15, in a service that he used on May 6, ‘as preparatory to my return to life to-morrow,’ he prays:⁠—‘Enable me to begin and perfect that reformation which I promised her, and to persevere in that resolution which she implored Thee to continue, in the purposes which I recorded in Thy sight when she lay dead before me.’ See <i>post</i>, Jan. 20, 1780. The author of <i>Memoirs of the Life and Writings of Dr. Johnson</i>, 1785, says, p. 113, that on the death of his wife, ‘to walk the streets of London was for many a lonesome night Johnson’s constant substitute for sleep.’</p>
		<p>[688] ‘I have often been inclined to think that, if this fondness of Johnson for his wife was not dissembled, it was a lesson that he had learned by rote, and that, when he practised it, he knew not where to stop till he became ridiculous.’ Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 313</p>
		<p>[689] The son of William Strahan, M.P., ‘Johnson’s old and constant friend, Printer to His Majesty’ (<i>post</i>, under April 20, 1781). He attended Johnson on his death-bed, and published the volume called <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>.</p>
		<p>[690] Southey in his <i>Life of Wesley</i>, i. 359, writes:⁠—‘The universal attention which has been paid to dreams in all ages proves that the superstition is natural; and I have heard too many well-attested facts (facts to which belief could not be refused upon any known laws of evidence) not to believe that impressions are sometimes made in this manner, and forewarnings communicated, which cannot be explained by material philosophy or mere metaphysics.’</p>
		<p>[691] Warburton in his <i>Divine Legation</i>, i. 284, quotes the ‘famous sepulchral inscription of the Roman widow.’ ‘Ita peto vos Manes sanctissimi commendatum habeatis meum conjugem et velitis huic indulgentissimi esse horis nocturnis ut eum videam,’ etc.</p>
		<p>[692] Mrs. Boswell died in June 1789. Johnson’s prayer with Boswell’s comments on it was first inserted in the <i>Additions</i> to the second edition.</p>
		<p>[693] Mrs. Johnson died on March 17, O. S., or March 28, N. S. The change of style was made in September, 1752. He might have kept either the 17th, or the 28th as the anniversary. In like manner, though he was born on Sept. 7, after the change he kept the 18th as his birth-day. See <i>post</i>, beginning of 1753, where he writes, ‘Jan. 1, N. S., which I shall use for the future.’</p>
		<p>[694] In <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, p. 22, he recorded: ‘The melancholy of this day hung long upon me.’ P. 53: ‘April 22, 1764, Thought on Tetty, dear, poor Tetty, with my eyes full.’ P. 91: ‘March 28, 1770. This is the day on which, in 1752, I was deprived of poor, dear Tetty.⁠ ⁠… When I recollect the time in which we lived together, my grief for her departure is not abated; and I have less pleasure in any good that befalls me because she does not partake it.’ P. 170: ‘April 20, 1778. Poor Tetty, whatever were our faults and failings, we loved each other. I did not forget thee yesterday [Easter Sunday]. Couldest thou have lived!’ P. 210: ‘March 28, 1782. This is the day on which, in 1752, dear Tetty died. I have now uttered a prayer of repentance and contrition; perhaps Tetty knows that I prayed for her. Perhaps Tetty is now praying for me. God help me.’ In a letter to Mrs. Thrale on the occasion of the death of her son (dated March 30, 1776) he thus refers to the loss of his wife:⁠—‘I know that a whole system of hopes, and designs, and expectations is swept away at once, and nothing left but bottomless vacuity. What you feel I have felt, and hope that your disquiet will be shorter than mine.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 310. In a letter to Mr. Elphinston, who had just lost his wife, written on July 27, 1778, he repeats the same thought:⁠—‘A loss such as yours lacerates the mind, and breaks the whole system of purposes and hopes. It leaves a dismal vacuity in life, which affords nothing on which the affections can fix, or to which endeavour may be directed. All this I have known.’ Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, p. 66, note. See also <i>post</i>, his letter to Mr. Warton of Dec. 21, 1754, and to Dr. Lawrence of Jan. 20, 1780.</p>
		<p>[695] In the usual monthly list of deaths in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. her name is not given. Johnson did not, I suppose, rank among ‘eminent persons.’</p>
		<p>[696] Irene, Act i. sc. 1.</p>
		<p>[697] See <i>post</i>, Nov. 16, 1784, note.</p>
		<p>[698] The Anderdon MSS. contain an importunate letter, dated July 3, 1751, from one Mitchell, a tradesman in Chandos-street, pressing Johnson to pay £2, due by his wife ever since August, 1749, and threatening legal proceedings to enforce payment. This letter Mr. Boswell had endorsed, ‘Proof of Dr. Johnson’s wretched circumstances in 1751.’ CROKER.</p>
		<p>[699] In the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for February, 1794, (p. 100,) was printed a letter pretending to be that written by Johnson on the death of his wife. But it is merely a transcript of the 41st number of <i>The Idler</i>. A fictitious date (March 17, 1751, O. S.) was added by some person previous to this paper being sent to the publisher of that miscellany, to give a colour to this deception. MALONE.</p>
		<p>[700] Francis Barber was born in Jamaica, and was brought to England in 1750 by Colonel Bathurst, father of Johnson’s very intimate friend, Dr. Bathurst. He was sent, for some time, to the Reverend Mr. Jackson’s school, at Barton, in Yorkshire. The Colonel by his will left him his freedom, and Dr. Bathurst was willing that he should enter into Johnson’s service, in which he continued from 1752 till Johnson’s death, with the exception of two intervals; in one of which, upon some difference with his master, he went and served an apothecary in Cheapside, but still visited Dr. Johnson occasionally; in another, he took a fancy to go to sea. Part of the time, indeed, he was, by the kindness of his master, at a school in Northamptonshire, that he might have the advantage of some learning. So early and so lasting a connection was there between Dr. Johnson and this humble friend. BOSWELL. ‘I believe that Francis was scarcely as much the object of Mr. Johnson’s personal kindness as the representative of Dr. Bathurst, for whose sake he would have loved anybody or anything.’ Piozzi’s <i>Anec</i>. p. 212.</p>
		<p>[701] ‘I asked him,’ writes Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. pp. 146⁠–⁠150), ‘if he ever disputed with his wife. “Perpetually,” said he; “my wife had a particular reverence for cleanliness, and desired the praise of neatness in her dress and furniture, as many ladies do, till they become troublesome to their best friends, slaves to their own besoms, and only sigh for the hour of sweeping their husbands out of the house as dirt and useless lumber. A clean floor is so comfortable, she would say sometimes by way of twitting; till at last I told her that I thought we had had talk enough about the floor, we would now have a touch at the ceiling.” I asked him if he ever huffed his wife about his dinner. “So often,” replied he, “that at last she called to me and said, Nay, hold, Mr. Johnson, and do not make a farce of thanking God for a dinner which in a few minutes you will protest not eatable.” ’</p>
		<p>[702] ‘When a friend is carried to his grave, we at once find excuses for every weakness, and palliations of every fault; we recollect a thousand endearments, which before glided off our minds without impression, a thousand favours unrepaid, a thousand duties unperformed; and wish, vainly wish, for his return, not so much that we may receive, as that we may bestow happiness, and recompense that kindness which before we never understood.’ <i>Rambler</i>, No. 54.</p>
		<p>[703] <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 19. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[704] Hawkins’s <i>Life of Johnson</i>, p. 316. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[705] See <i>post</i>, Oct. 26, 1769, where the Roman Catholic doctrine of purgatory or ‘a middle state,’ as Johnson calls it is discussed, and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 25, 1773.</p>
		<p>[706] In the original, ‘lawful <i>for</i> me.’ Much the same prayer Johnson made for his mother. <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 38. On Easter Day, 1764, he records:⁠—‘After sermon I recommended Tetty in a prayer by herself; and my father, mother, brother, and Bathurst in another. I did it only once, so far as it might be lawful for me.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 54. On the death of Mr. Thrale he wrote, ‘May God that delighteth in mercy <i>have had</i> mercy on thee.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 191; and later on, ‘for Henry Thrale, so far as is lawful, I humbly implore thy mercy in his present state.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 197.</p>
		<p>[707] <i>Pr. and Med</i>., p. 20. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[708] Shortly before his death (see <i>post,</i> July 12, 1784) Johnson had a stone placed over her grave with the following inscription:⁠—</p>
		<p>Hic conduntur reliquiae<br/>
		ELIZABETHÆ<br/>
		Antiqua Jarvisiorum Leicestrienses, ortae;<br/>
		Formosae, cultae, ingeniosae, piae;<br/>
		Uxoris, primis nuptiis, Henrici Porter,<br/>
		Secundis Samuelis Johnson:<br/>
		Qui multum amatam, diuque defletam<br/>
		Hoc lapide contexit.<br/>
		Obiit Londini Mense Mart.<br/>
		A.D. MDCCLIII<br/></p>
		<p>As Mrs. Johnson died in 1752, the date is wrong.</p>
		<p>[709] See <i>post</i>, Sept. 21. 1777.</p>
		<p>[710] He described her as a woman ‘whom none, who were capable of distinguishing either moral or intellectual excellence, could know without esteem or tenderness. She was extensively charitable in her judgements and opinions, grateful for every kindness that she received, and willing to impart assistance of every kind to all whom her little power enabled her to benefit. She passed through many months of languor, weakness, and decay without a single murmur of impatience, and often expressed her adoration of that mercy which granted her so long time for recollection and penitence.’ Johnson’s <i>Works,</i> ix. 523.</p>
		<p>[711] See <i>ante</i>, p. 187.</p>
		<p>[712] Dr. Bathurst, though a Physician of no inconsiderable merit, had not the good fortune to get much practice in London. He was, therefore willing to accept of employment abroad, and, to the regret of all who knew him, fell a sacrifice to the destructive climate, in the expedition against the Havannah. Mr. Langton recollects the following passage in a letter from Dr. Johnson to Mr. Beauclerk: ‘The Havannah is taken;⁠—a conquest too dearly obtained; for, Bathurst died before it. “<i>Vix Priamus tanti totaque Troja fuit</i>.” ’ BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>The quotation is from Ovid, <i>Heroides</i>, i. 4. Johnson (<i>post</i>, Dec. 21, 1762) wrote to Baretti, ‘Bathurst went physician to the army, and died at the Havannah.’ Mr. Harwood in his <i>History of Lichfield</i>, p. 451, gives two letters from Bathurst to Johnson dated 1757. In the postscript to one he says:⁠—‘I know you will call me a lazy dog, and in truth I deserve it; but I am afraid I shall never mend. I have indeed long known that I can love my friends without being able to tell them so.⁠ ⁠… Adieu my dearest friend.’ He calls Johnson ‘the best of friends, to whom I stand indebted for all the little virtue and knowledge that I have.’ ‘Nothing,’ he continues, ‘I think, but absolute want can force me to continue where I am.’ Jamaica he calls ‘this execrable region.’ Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 235) says that ‘Bathurst, before leaving England, confessed to Johnson that in the course of ten years’ exercise of his faculty he had never opened his hand to more than one guinea.’ Johnson perhaps had Bathurst in mind when, many years later, he wrote:⁠—‘A physician in a great city seems to be the mere plaything of fortune; his degree of reputation is for the most part totally casual; they that employ him know not his excellence; they that reject him know not his deficience. By any acute observer, who had looked on the transactions of the medical world for half a century, a very curious book might be written on the <i>Fortune of Physicians</i>.’ <i>Works</i>, viii. 471.</p>
		<p>[713] Mr. Ryland was one of the members of the old club in Ivy Lane who met to dine in 1783. Mr. Payne was another, (<i>post</i>, end of 1783).</p>
		<p>[714] Johnson revised her volumes: <i>post</i>, under Nov. 19, 1783.</p>
		<p>[715] Catherine Sawbridge, sister of Mrs. [? Mr.] Alderman Sawbridge, was born in 1733; but it was not till 1760 that she was married to Dr. Macaulay, a physician; so that Barber’s account was incorrect either in date or name. CROKER. For Alderman Sawbridge see <i>post</i>, May 17, 1778, note.</p>
		<p>[716] See <i>post</i>, under Nov. 19, 1783. Johnson bequeathed to her a book to keep as a token of remembrance (<i>post</i>, Dec. 9, 1784). I find her name in the year 1765 in the list of subscribers to the edition of Swift’s <i>Works</i>, in 17 vols., so that perhaps she was more ‘in the learned way’ than Barber thought.</p>
		<p>[717] Reynolds did not return to England from Italy till the October of this year, seven months after Mrs. Johnson’s death. Taylor’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 87. He writes of his ‘thirty years’ intimacy with Dr. Johnson.’ He must have known him therefore at least as early as 1754. <i>Ib</i>. ii. 454.</p>
		<p>[718] See <i>ante</i>, p. 185.</p>
		<p>[719] ‘Lord Southwell,’ said Johnson, ‘was the most <i>qualitied</i> man I ever saw.’ <i>Post</i>, March 23, 1783.</p>
		<p>[720] The account given of Levet in <i>Gent. Mag</i>. lv. 101, shews that he was a man out of the common run. He would not otherwise have attracted the notice of the French surgeons. The writer says:⁠—‘Mr. Levet, though an Englishman by birth, became early in life a waiter at a coffee-house in Paris. The surgeons who frequented it, finding him of an inquisitive turn and attentive to their conversation, made a purse for him, and gave him some instructions in their art. They afterwards furnished him with the means of further knowledge, by procuring him free admission to such lectures in pharmacy and anatomy as were read by the ablest professors of that period.’ When he lived with Johnson, ‘much of the day was employed in attendance on his patients, who were chiefly of the lowest rank of tradesmen. The remainder of his hours he dedicated to Hunter’s lectures, and to as many different opportunities of improvement as he could meet with on the same gratuitous conditions.’ ‘All his medical knowledge,’ said Johnson, ‘and it is not inconsiderable, was obtained through the ear. Though he buys books, he seldom looks into them, or discovers any power by which he can be supposed to judge of an author’s merit.’ ‘Dr. Johnson has frequently observed that Levet was indebted to him for nothing more than house-room, his share in a penny-loaf at breakfast, and now and then a dinner on a Sunday. His character was rendered valuable by repeated proof of honesty, tenderness, and gratitude to his benefactor, as well as by an unwearied diligence in his profession. His single failing was an occasional departure from sobriety. Johnson would observe, “he was perhaps the only man who ever became intoxicated through motives of prudence. He reflected that, if he refused the gin or brandy offered him by some of his patients, he could have been no gainer by their cure, as they might have had nothing else to bestow on him. This habit of taking a fee, in whatever shape it was exhibited, could not be put off by advice. He would swallow what he did not like, nay what he knew would injure him, rather than go home with an idea that his skill had been exerted without recompense. Though he took all that was offered him, he demanded nothing from the poor.” ’ The writer adds that ‘Johnson never wished him to be regarded as an inferior, or treated him like a dependent.’ Mrs. Piozzi says:⁠—‘When Johnson raised contributions for some distressed author, or wit in want, he often made us all more than amends by diverting descriptions of the lives they were then passing in corners unseen by anybody but himself, and that odd old surgeon whom he kept in his house to tend the outpensioners, and of whom he said most truly and sublimely, that</p>
		<p>“In misery’s darkest caverns known,” ’ etc. Piozzi’s <i>Anec</i>., p. 118.</p>
		<p>‘Levet, madam, is a brutal fellow, but I have a good regard for him; for his brutality is in his manners, not in his mind.’ Mme. D’Arblay’s <i>Diary</i>, i. 115. ‘Whoever called in on Johnson at about midday found him and Levet at breakfast, Johnson, in deshabille, as just risen from bed, and Levet filling out tea for himself and his patron alternately, no conversation passing between them. All that visited him at these hours were welcome. A night’s rest and breakfast seldom failed to refresh and fit him for discourse, and whoever withdrew went too soon.’ Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 435.</p>
		<p>How much he valued his poor friend he showed at his death, <i>post</i>, Jan. 20, 1782.</p>
		<p>[721]</p>
		<p>‘O et praesidium et dulce decus meum.’<br/>
		‘My joy, my guard, and sweetest good.’<br/></p>
		<p>CREECH. Horace, <i>Odes</i>, i. I. 2.</p>
		<p>[722] It was in 1738 that Johnson was living in Castle Street. At the time of Reynolds’s arrival in London in 1752 he had been living for some years in Gough Square. Boswell, I suppose, only means to say that Johnson’s acquaintance with the Cotterells was formed when he lived in their neighbourhood. Northcote (<i>Life of Reynolds</i>, i. 69) says that the Cotterells lived ‘opposite to Reynolds’s,’ but his account seems based on a misunderstanding of Boswell.</p>
		<p>[723] <i>Ante</i>, p. 165.</p>
		<p>[724] ‘We are both of Dr. Johnson’s school,’ wrote Reynolds to some friend. ‘For my own part, I acknowledge the highest obligations to him. He may be said to have formed my mind, and to have brushed from it a great deal of rubbish. Those very persons whom he has brought to think rightly will occasionally criticise the opinions of their master when he nods. But we should always recollect that it is he himself who taught us and enabled us to do it.’ Taylor’s <i>Reynolds</i>, ii. 461. Burke, writing to Malone, said:⁠—‘You state very properly how much Reynolds owed to the writings and conversation of Johnson; and nothing shews more the greatness of Sir Joshua’s parts than his taking advantage of both, and making some application of them to his profession, when Johnson neither understood nor desired to understand anything of painting.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 638. Reynolds, there can be little question, is thinking of Johnson in the following passage in his <i>Seventh Discourse</i>:⁠—‘What partial and desultory reading cannot afford may be supplied by the conversation of learned and ingenious men, which is the best of all substitutes for those who have not the means or opportunities of deep study. There are many such men in this age: and they will be pleased with communicating their ideas to artists, when they see them curious and docile, if they are treated with that respect and deference which is so justly their due. Into such society young artists, if they make it the point of their ambition, will by degrees be admitted. There, without formal teaching, they will insensibly come to feel and reason like those they live with, and find a rational and systematic taste imperceptibly formed in their minds, which they will know how to reduce to a standard, by applying general truth to their own purposes, better perhaps than those to whom they owned [?owed] the original sentiment.’ Reynolds’s <i>Works</i>, edit. 1824, i. 149. ‘Another thing remarkable to shew how little Sir Joshua crouched to the great is, that he never gave them their proper titles. I never heard the words “your lordship” or “your ladyship” come from his mouth; nor did he ever say “Sir” in speaking to any one but Dr. Johnson; and when he did not hear distinctly what the latter said (which often happened) he would then say “Sir?” that he might repeat it.’ Northcote’s <i>Conversations</i>, p. 289. Gibbon called Johnson ‘Reynolds’s oracle.’ Gibbon’s <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 149. See also <i>post</i>, under Dec. 29, 1778.</p>
		<p>[725] The thought may have been suggested to Reynolds by Johnson’s writings. In <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 87, he had said:⁠—‘There are minds so impatient of inferiority, that their gratitude is a species of revenge, and they return benefits, not because recompense is a pleasure, but because obligation is a pain.’ In No. 166, he says:⁠—‘To be obliged is to be in some respect inferior to another.’</p>
		<p>[726] Northcote tells the following story on the authority of Miss Reynolds. It is to be noticed, however, that in her <i>Recollections</i> (Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, p. 832) the story is told somewhat differently. Johnson, Reynolds and Miss Reynolds one day called on the Miss Cotterells. ‘Johnson was the last of the three that came in; when the maid, seeing this uncouth and dirty figure of a man, and not conceiving he could be one of the company, laid hold of his coat, just as he was going up-stairs, and pulled him back again, saying, “You fellow, what is your business here? I suppose you intended to rob the house.” This most unlucky accident threw him into such a fit of shame and anger that he roared out like a bull, “What have I done? What have I done?” ’ Northcote’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 73.</p>
		<p>[727] Johnson writing to Langton on January 9, 1759, describes him as ‘towering in the confidence of twenty-one.’ The conclusion of <i>The Rambler</i> was in March 1752, when Langton must have been only fourteen or just fifteen at most; Johnson’s first letter to him dated May 6, 1755, shews that at that time their acquaintance had been but short. Langton’s subscription to the Thirty-nine Articles in the Register of the University of Oxford was on July 7, 1757. Johnson’s first letter to him at Oxford is dated June 28, 1757.</p>
		<p>[728] See <i>post</i>, March 20, 1782.</p>
		<p>[729] ‘My friend Maltby and I,’ said Samuel Rogers, ‘when we were very young men, had a strong desire to see Dr. Johnson; and we determined to call upon him, and introduce ourselves. We accordingly proceeded to his house in Bolt Court; and I had my hand on the knocker when our courage failed us, and we retreated. Many years afterwards I mentioned this circumstance to Boswell, who said, “What a pity that you did not go boldly in! He would have received you with all kindness.” ’ Rogers’s <i>Table Talk</i>, p. 9. For Johnson’s levee see <i>post</i>, 1770, in Dr. Maxwell’s <i>Collectanea</i>.</p>
		<p>[730] ‘George Langton,’ writes Mr. Best in his <i>Memorials</i> (p. 66), ‘shewed me his pedigree with the names and arms of the families with which his own had intermarried. It was engrossed on a piece of parchment about ten inches broad, and twelve to fifteen feet long. “It leaves off at the reign of Queen Elizabeth,” said he.’</p>
		<p>[731] Topham Beauclerk was the only son of Lord Sidney Beauclerk, fifth son of the first Duke of St. Alban’s. He was therefore the great-grandson of Charles II. and Nell Gwynne. He was born in Dec. 1739. In my <i>Dr. Johnson: His Friends and his Critics</i> I have put together such facts as I could find about Langton and Beauclerk.</p>
		<p>[732] Mr. Best describes Langton as ‘a very tall, meagre, long-visaged man, much resembling a stork standing on one leg near the shore in Raphael’s cartoon of the Miraculous Draught of Fishes. His manners were, in the highest degree, polished; his conversation mild, equable and always pleasing.’ Best’s <i>Memorials</i>, p. 62. Miss Hawkins writes:⁠—‘If I were called on to name the person with whom Johnson might have been seen to the fairest advantage, I should certainly name Mr. Langton.’ Miss Hawkins’s <i>Memoirs</i>, i. 144. Mrs. Piozzi wrote in 1817:⁠—‘I remember when to have Langton at a man’s house stamped him at once a literary character.’ Hayward’s <i>Piozzi</i>, ii. 203.</p>
		<p>[733] In the summer of 1759. See <i>post</i>, under April 15, 1758, and 1759.</p>
		<p>[734] Lord Charlemont said that ‘Beauclerk possessed an exquisite taste, various accomplishments, and the most perfect good breeding. He was eccentric, often querulous, entertaining a contempt for the generality of the world, which the politeness of his manners could not always conceal; but to those whom he liked most generous and friendly. Devoted at one time to pleasure, at another to literature, sometimes absorbed in play, sometimes in books, he was altogether one of the most accomplished, and when in good humour and surrounded by those who suited his fancy, one of the most agreeable men that could possibly exist.’ Lord Charlemont’s <i>Life</i>, i. 210. Hawkins writes (<i>Life</i>, p. 422) that ‘over all his behaviour there beamed such a sunshine of cheerfulness and good-humour as communicated itself to all around him.’ Mrs. Piozzi said of him:⁠—‘Topham Beauclerk (wicked and profligate as he wished to be accounted) was yet a man of very strict veracity. Oh Lord! how I did hate that horrid Beauclerk.’ Hayward’s <i>Piozzi</i>, i. 348. Rogers (<i>Table-Talk</i>, p. 40) said that ‘Beauclerk was a strangely absent person.’ He once went to dress for a dinner-party in his own house. ‘He forgot all about his guests; thought that it was bed-time, and got into bed. His servant, coming to tell him that his guests were waiting for him, found him fast asleep.’</p>
		<p>[735] It was to the Round-house that Captain Booth was first taken in Fielding’s <i>Amelia</i>, Book i, chap. 2.</p>
		<p>[736]</p>
		<p>‘Blends, in exception to all general rules,<br/>
		Your taste of follies with our scorn of fools.’<br/></p>
		<p>Pope, <i>Moral Essays</i>, ii. 275.</p>
		<p>[737] In the college which <i>The Club</i> was to set up at St. Andrew’s, Beauclerk was to have the chair of natural philosophy. Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 25, 1773. Goldsmith, writing to Langton in 1771, says: ‘Mr. Beauclerk is now going directly forward to become a second Boyle; deep in chymistry and physics.’ Forster’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 283. Boswell described to Temple, in 1775, Beauclerk’s villa at Muswell Hill, with its ‘observatory, laboratory for chymical experiments.’ Boswell’s <i>Letters</i>, p. 194.</p>
		<p>[738] ‘I’ll purge, and leave sack, and live cleanly as a nobleman should do.’ 1 Henry IV. Act v. sc. 4.</p>
		<p>[739] ‘Bishop. A cant word for a mixture of wine, oranges, and sugar.’ Johnson’s <i>Dictionary</i>.</p>
		<p>[740] Mr. Langton has recollected, or Dr. Johnson repeated, the passage wrong. The lines are in Lord Lansdowne’s Drinking Song to Sleep, and run thus:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Short, very short be then thy reign,<br/>
		For I’m in haste to laugh and drink again.’ BOSWELL.<br/></p>
		<p>Lord Lansdowne was the Granville of Pope’s couplet⁠—</p>
		<p>‘But why then publish? Granville the polite,<br/>
		And knowing Walsh, would tell me I could write.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>Prologue to the Satires,</i> 1.135.</p>
		<p>[741] Boswell in <i>Hebrides</i> (Aug. 18, 1773) says that Johnson, on starting from Edinburgh, left behind in an open drawer in Boswell’s house ‘one volume of a pretty full and curious Diary of his life, of which I have a few fragments.’ He also states (<i>post</i>, under Dec 9, 1784):⁠—‘I owned to him, that having accidentally seen them [two quarto volumes of his <i>Life</i>] I had read a great deal in them.’ It would seem that he had also transcribed a portion.</p>
		<p>[742] This is inconsistent with what immediately follows, for No. 39 on Sleep was published on March 20.</p>
		<p>[743] Hawkesworth in the last number of <i>The Adventurer</i> says that he had help at first from A.; ‘but this resource soon failing, I was obliged to carry on the publication alone, except some casual supplies, till I obtained from the gentlemen who have distinguished their papers by T and Z, such assistance as I most wished.’ In a note he says that the papers signed Z are by the Rev. Mr. Warton. The papers signed A are written in a light style. In Southey’s <i>Cowper</i>, i. 47, it is said that Bonnell Thornton wrote them.</p>
		<p>[744] Boswell had read the passage carelessly. Statius is mentioned, but the writer goes on to quote <i>Cowley</i>, whose Latin lines C. B. has translated. Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, iv. 10.</p>
		<p>[745] Malone says that ‘Johnson was fond of him, but latterly owned that Hawkesworth⁠—who had set out a modest, humble man⁠—was one of the many whom success in the world had spoiled. He was latterly, as Sir Joshua Reynolds told me, an affected insincere man, and a great coscomb in his dress. He had no literature whatever.’ Prior’s <i>Malone</i>, p. 441. See <i>post</i>, April 11 and May 7, 1773, and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 3.</p>
		<p>[746] ‘Johnson’s statement to Warton is definite and is borne out by internal evidence, if internal evidence can be needful when he had once made a definite statement. The papers signed <i>Misargyrus</i>, the first of which appeared on March 3, are all below his style. They were not, I feel sure, written by him, and are improperly given in the Oxford edition of his works. I do not find in them even any traces of his hand. The paper on Sleep, No. 39, is I am almost sure, partly his, but I believe it is not wholly. In the frequency of quotations in the first part of it I see another, and probably a younger author. The passage on the ‘low drudgery of digesting dictionaries’ is almost certainly his. Dr. Bathurst, perhaps, wrote the Essay, and Johnson corrected it. Whether it was Johnson’s or not, it was published after the letter to Dr. Warton was written.</p>
		<p>[747] See <i>post</i>, April 25, 1778, for an instance where Johnson’s silence did not imply assent.</p>
		<p>[748] ‘One evening at the Club Johnson proposed to us the celebrating the birth of Mrs. Lennox’s first literary child, as he called her book, [<i>The Life of Harriet Stuart</i>, a novel, published Dec. 1750] by a whole night spent in festivity. Our supper was elegant, and Johnson had directed that a magnificent hot apple-pie should make a part of it, and this he would have stuck with bay-leaves, because, forsooth, Mrs. Lennox was an authoress, and had written verses; and further, he had prepared for her a crown of laurel, with which, but not till he had invoked the Muses by some ceremonies of his own invention, he encircled her brows. About five Johnson’s face shone with meridian splendour, though his drink had been only lemonade.’ Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 286. See <i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton’s ‘Collection,’ and May 15, 1784.</p>
		<p>[749] In a document in the possession of one of Cave’s collateral descendants which I have seen dated May 3, 1754, and headed, ‘Present state of the late Mr. Edward Cave’s effects,’ I found entered ‘<i>Magazine</i>, £3,000. <i>Daily Advertiser</i>, £900.’ The total value of the effects was £8,708.</p>
		<p>[750] Johnson records of his friend that ‘one of the last acts of reason which he exerted was fondly to press the hand that is now writing this little narrative.’ <i>Works</i>, vi. 433.</p>
		<p>[751] See Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 189.</p>
		<p>[752] Lord Chesterfield writing to his son in 1751 (<i>Letters</i>, iii. 136) said:⁠—‘People in high life are hardened to the wants and distresses of mankind, as surgeons are to their bodily pains; they see and hear of them all day long, and even of so many simulated ones, that they do not know which has are real, and which are not. Other sentiments are therefore to be applied to than those of mere justice and humanity; their favour must be captivated by the <i>suaviter in modo</i>; their love of ease disturbed by unwearied importunity; or their fears wrought upon by a decent intimation of implacable, cool resentment: this is the true <i>fortiter in re</i>! He was himself to experience an instance of the true <i>fortiter in re</i>.</p>
		<p>[753] If Lord Chesterfield had read the last number of <i>The Rambler</i> (published in March, 1752) he could scarcely have flattered himself with these expectations. Johnson, after saying that he would not endeavour to overbear the censures of criticism by the influence of a patron, added:⁠—‘The supplications of an author never yet reprieved him a moment from oblivion; and, though greatness sometimes sheltered guilt, it can afford no protection to ignorance or dulness. Having hitherto attempted only the propagation of truth, I will not at last violate it by the confession of terrors which I do not feel; having laboured to maintain the dignity of virtue, I will not now degrade it by the meanness of dedication.’</p>
		<p>[754] On Nov. 28 and Dec. 5, 1754. <i>The World</i>, by Adam Fitz-Adam, Jan. 1753 to Dec. 1765. The editor was Edward Moore. Among the contributors were the Earls of Chesterfield and Corke, Horace Walpole, R. O. Cambridge, and Soame Jenyns. See <i>post</i>, July 1, 1763.</p>
		<p>[755] With these papers as a whole Johnson would have been highly offended. The anonymous writer hopes that his readers will not suspect him ‘of being a hired and interested puff of this work.’ ‘I most solemnly protest,’ he goes on to say, ‘that neither Mr. Johnson, nor any booksellers have ever offered me the usual compliment of a pair of gloves or a bottle of wine.’ It is a pretty piece of irony for a wealthy nobleman solemnly to protest that he has not been bribed by a poor author, whom seven years before he had repulsed from his door. But Chesterfield did worse than this. By way of recommending a work of so much learning and so much labour he tells a foolish story of an assignation that had failed ‘between a fine gentleman and a fine lady.’ The letter that had passed between them had been badly spelt, and they had gone to different houses. ‘Such examples,’ he wrote, ‘really make one tremble; and will, I am convinced, determine my fair fellow-subjects and their adherents to adopt and scrupulously conform to Mr. Johnson’s rules of true orthography.’ Johnson, in the last year of his life, at a time of great weakness and depression, defended the roughness of his manner. ‘I have done more good as I am. Obscenity and impiety have always been repressed in my company’ (<i>post</i>, June 11, 1784).</p>
		<p>[756] In the original ‘Mr. Johnson.’</p>
		<p>[757] In the original ‘unnecessary foreign ornaments.’</p>
		<p>[758] In the original, ‘will now, and, I dare say.’</p>
		<p>[759] Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 191) says that Chesterfield, further to appease Johnson, sent to him Sir Thomas Robinson (see <i>post</i>, July 19, 1763), who was ‘to apologise for his lordship’s treatment of him, and to make him tenders of his future friendship and patronage. Sir Thomas, whose talent was flattery, was profuse in his commendations of Johnson and his writings, and declared that, were his circumstances other than they were, himself would settle £500 a year on him. ‘And who are you,’ asked Johnson, ‘that talk thus liberally?’ ‘I am,’ said the other, ‘Sir Thomas Robinson, a Yorkshire baronet.’ ‘Sir,’ replied Johnson, ‘if the first peer of the realm were to make me such an offer, I would shew him the way down stairs.’</p>
		<p>[760] <i>Paradise Lost</i>, ii. 112.</p>
		<p>[761] Johnson, perhaps, was thinking of his interviews with Chesterfield, when in his <i>Rambler</i> on ‘The Mischiefs of following a Patron’ (No. 163) he wrote:⁠—‘If you, Mr. Rambler, have ever ventured your philosophy within the attraction of greatness, you know the force of such language, introduced with a smile of gracious tenderness, and impressed at the conclusion with an air of solemn sincerity.’</p>
		<p>[762] Johnson said to Garrick:⁠—‘I have sailed a long and painful voyage round the world of the English language; and does he now send out two cock-boats to tow me into harbour?’ Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 74. This metaphor may perhaps have been suggested to Johnson by Warburton. ‘I now begin to see land, after having wandered, according to Mr. Warburton’s phrase, in this vast sea of words.’ <i>Post</i>, Feb. 1, 1755.</p>
		<p>[763] See <i>post</i>, Nov. 22, 1779, and April 8, 1780. Sir Henry Ellis says that ‘address’ in Johnson’s own copy of his letter to Lord Chesterfield is spelt twice with one <i>d</i>. Croker’s <i>Corres</i>. ii. 44. In the series of Letters by Johnson given in <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S. v, Johnson writes <i>persuit</i> (p. 325); ‘I cannot <i>butt</i> (p. 342); ‘to retain <i>council</i>‘ (p. 343); <i>harrassed</i> (p. 423); <i>imbecillity</i> (p. 482). In a letter to Nichols quoted by me, <i>post</i>, beginning of 1783, he writes <i>ilness</i>. He commonly, perhaps always, spelt <i>Boswell Boswel</i>, and Nichols’s name in one series of letters he spelt Nichols, Nichol, and Nicol. <i>Post</i>, beginning of 1781, note.</p>
		<p>[764] Dr. Johnson appeared to have had a remarkable delicacy with respect to the circulation of this letter; for Dr. Douglas, Bishop of Salisbury, informs me that, having many years ago pressed him to be allowed to read it to the second Lord Hardwicke, who was very desirous to hear it (promising at the same time, that no copy of it should be taken), Johnson seemed much pleased that it had attracted the attention of a nobleman of such a respectable character; but after pausing some time, declined to comply with the request, saying, with a smile, ‘No, Sir; I have hurt the dog too much already;’ or words to that purpose. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[765] See <i>post</i>, June 4, 1781.</p>
		<p>[766] In 1790, the year before the <i>Life of Johnson</i> came out, Boswell published this letter in a separate sheet of four quarto pages under the following title:⁠—<i>The celebrated Letter from Samuel Johnson, LL.D., to Philip Dormer Stanhope, Earl of Chesterfield; Now first published with Notes, by James Boswell, Esq., London. Printed by Henry Baldwin: for Charles Dilly in the Poultry, MDCCXC. Price Half-a-Guinea. Entered in the Hall-Book of the Company of Stationers</i>. It belongs to the same impression as <i>The Life of Johnson</i>.</p>
		<p>[767] ‘Je chante le vainqueur des vainqueurs de la terre.’ Boileau, <i>L’Art poétique</i>, iii. 272.</p>
		<p>[768] The following note is subjoined by Mr. Langton:⁠—‘Dr. Johnson, when he gave me this copy of his letter, desired that I would annex to it his information to me, that whereas it is said in the letter that “no assistance has been received,” he did once receive from Lord Chesterfield the sum of ten pounds; but as that was so inconsiderable a sum, he thought the mention of it could not properly find place in a letter of the kind that this was.’ BOSWELL. ‘This surely is an unsatisfactory excuse,’ writes Mr. Croker. He read Johnson’s letter carelessly, as the rest of his note shews. Johnson says, that during the seven years that had passed since he was repulsed from Chesterfield’s door he had pushed on his work without one act of assistance. These ten pounds, we may feel sure, had been received before the seven years began to run. No doubt they had been given in 1747 as an acknowledgement of the compliment paid to Chesterfield in the <i>Plan</i>. He had at first been misled by Chesterfield’s one act of kindness, but he had long had his eyes opened. Like the shepherd in Virgil (<i>Eclogues</i>, viii. 43) he could say:⁠—’<i>Nunc</i> scio quid sit Amor.’</p>
		<p>[769] In this passage Dr. Johnson evidently alludes to the loss of his wife. We find the same tender recollection recurring to his mind upon innumerable occasions: and, perhaps no man ever more forcibly felt the truth of the sentiment so elegantly expressed by my friend Mr. Malone, in his Prologue to Mr. Jephson’s tragedy of JULIA [<i>Julia or the Italian Lover</i> was acted for the first time on April 17, 1787. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. 1787, p. 354]:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Vain⁠—wealth, and fame, and fortune’s fostering care,<br/>
		If no fond breast the splendid blessings share;<br/>
		And, each day’s bustling pageantry once past,<br/>
		There, only there, our bliss is found at last.’ BOSWELL.<br/></p>
		<p>Three years earlier, when his wife was dying, he had written in one of the last <i>Ramblers</i> (No 203):⁠—‘It is necessary to the completion of every good, that it be timely obtained; for whatever comes at the close of life will come too late to give much delight⁠ ⁠… What we acquire by bravery or science, by mental or corporal diligence, comes at last when we cannot communicate, and therefore cannot enjoy it.’ Chesterfield himself was in no happy state. Less than a month before he received Johnson’s letter he wrote (<i>Works</i>, iii. 308):⁠—‘For these six months past, it seems as if all the complaints that ever attacked heads had joined to overpower mine. Continual noises, headache, giddiness, and impenetrable deafness; I could not stoop to write; and even reading, the only resource of the deaf, was painful to me.’ He wrote to his son a year earlier (<i>Letters</i>, iv. 43), ‘Reading, which was always a pleasure to me in the time even of my greatest dissipation, is now become my only refuge; and I fear I indulge it too much at the expense of my eyes. But what can I do? I must do something. I cannot bear absolute idleness; my ears grow every day more useless to me, my eyes consequently more necessary. I will not hoard them like a miser, but will rather risk the loss than not enjoy the use of them.’</p>
		<p>[770] ‘<i>The English Dictionary</i> was written with little assistance of the learned, and without any patronage of the great; not in the soft obscurities of retirement, or under the shelter of academick bowers, but amidst inconvenience and distraction, in sickness and in sorrow.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i> v. 51.</p>
		<p>[771] Upon comparing this copy with that which Dr. Johnson dictated to me from recollection, the variations are found to be so slight, that this must be added to the many other proofs which he gave of the wonderful extent and accuracy of his memory. To gratify the curious in composition, I have deposited both the copies in the British Museum. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[772] Soon after Edwards’s <i>Canons of Criticism</i> came out, Johnson was dining at Tonson the Bookseller’s with Hayman the Painter and some more company. Hayman related to Sir Joshua Reynolds, that the conversation having turned upon Edwards’s book, the gentlemen praised it much, and Johnson allowed its merit. But when they went farther, and appeared to put that author upon a level with Warburton, ‘Nay, (said Johnson,) he has given him some smart hits to be sure; but there is no proportion between the two men; they must not be named together. A fly, Sir, may sting a stately horse and make him wince; but one is but an insect, and the other is a horse still.’ BOSWELL. Johnson in his <i>Preface to Shakespeare</i> (<i>Works</i>, v. 141) wrote:⁠—‘Dr. Warburton’s chief assailants are the authors of <i>The Canons of Criticism</i>, and of <i>The Revisal of Shakespeare’s Text</i>.⁠ ⁠… The one stings like a fly, sucks a little blood, takes a gay flutter and returns for more; the other bites like a viper.⁠ ⁠… When I think on one with his confederates, I remember the danger of Coriolanus, who was afraid that “girls with spits, and boys with stones, should slay him in puny battle;” when the other crosses my imagination, I remember the prodigy in <i>Macbeth</i>:</p>
		<p>“A falcon tow’ring in his pride of place,<br/>
		Was by a mousing owl hawk’d at and kill’d.”<br/></p>
		<p>Let me, however, do them justice. One is a wit and one a scholar.’</p>
		<p>[773] To Johnson might be applied what he himself said of Dryden:⁠—‘He appears to have known in its whole extent the dignity of his character, and to have set a very high value on his own powers and performances.’ <i>Works</i>, vii. 291.</p>
		<p>[774] In the original <i>Yet mark</i>.</p>
		<p>[775] In the original <i>Toil</i>.</p>
		<p>[776] In his <i>Dictionary</i> he defined <i>patron</i> as ‘commonly a wretch who supports with insolence and is paid with flattery.’ This definition disappears in the <i>Abridgement</i>, but remains in the fourth edition.</p>
		<p>[777] Chesterfield, when he read Johnson’s letter to Dodsley, was acting up to the advice that he had given his own son six years earlier (<i>Letters</i>, ii. 172):⁠—‘When things of this kind [bons mots] happen to be said of you, the most prudent way is to seem not to suppose that they are meant at you, but to dissemble and conceal whatever degree of anger you may feel inwardly: and, should they be so plain, that you cannot be supposed ignorant of their meaning, so join in the laugh of the company against yourself; acknowledge the hit to be a fair one, and the jest a good one, and play off the whole thing in seeming good humour; but by no means reply in the same way; which only shows that you are hurt, and publishes the victory which you might have concealed.’</p>
		<p>[778] See <i>post</i>, March 23, 1783, where Johnson said that ‘Lord Chesterfield was dignified, but he was insolent;’ and June 27, 1784, where he said that ‘his manner was exquisitely elegant.’</p>
		<p>[779]</p>
		<p>‘Whate’er of mongrel no one class admits,<br/>
		A wit with dunces, and a dunce with wits.’<br/></p>
		<p>Pope’s <i>Dunciad</i>, iv. 90.</p>
		<p>‘A true choice spirit we admit;<br/>
		With wits a fool, with fools a wit.’<br/></p>
		<p>Churchill’s <i>Duellist</i>‘ Book iii.</p>
		<p>‘The solemn fop, significant and budge;<br/>
		A fool with judges, amongst fools a judge.’<br/></p>
		<p>Cowper’s <i>Poems</i>, <i>Conversation</i>, 1. 299.</p>
		<p>According to Rebecca Warner (<i>Original Letters</i>, p. 204), Johnson telling Joseph Fowke about his refusal to dedicate his <i>Dictionary</i> to Chesterfield, said: ‘Sir, I found I must have gilded a rotten post.’</p>
		<p>[780] That collection of letters cannot be vindicated from the serious charge of encouraging, in some passages, one of the vices most destructive to the good order and comfort of society, which his Lordship represents as mere fashionable gallantry; and, in others, of inculcating the base practice of dissimulation, and recommending, with disproportionate anxiety, a perpetual attention to external elegance of manners. But it must, at the same time, be allowed, that they contain many good precepts of conduct, and much genuine information upon life and manners, very happily expressed; and that there was considerable merit in paying so much attention to the improvement of one who was dependent upon his Lordship’s protection; it has, probably, been exceeded in no instance by the most exemplary parent; and though I can by no means approve of confounding the distinction between lawful and illicit offspring, which is, in effect, insulting the civil establishment of our country, to look no higher; I cannot help thinking it laudable to be kindly attentive to those, of whose existence we have, in any way, been the cause. Mr. Stanhope’s character has been unjustly represented as diametrically opposite to what Lord Chesterfield wished him to be. He has been called dull, gross, and awkward; but I knew him at Dresden, when he was Envoy to that court; and though he could not boast of the <i>graces</i>, he was, in truth, a sensible, civil, well-behaved man. BOSWELL. See <i>post</i>, March 28, 1775, under April, 29, 1776, and June 27, 1784.</p>
		<p>[781] Chesterfield’s <i>Letters</i>, iii. 129.</p>
		<p>[782] Now one of his Majesty’s principal Secretaries of State. BOSWELL. Afterwards Viscount Melville.</p>
		<p>[783] Probably George, second Earl of Macclesfield, who was, in 1752, elected President of the Royal Society. CROKER. Horace Walpole (<i>Letters</i>, ii. 321) mentions him as ‘engaged to a party for finding out the longitude.’</p>
		<p>[784] In another work (<i>Dr. Johnson: His Friends and his Critics</i>, p. 214), I have shewn that Lord Chesterfield’s ‘Respectable Hottentot’ was not Johnson. From the beginning of 1748 to the end of 1754 Chesterfield had no dealings of any kind with Johnson. At no time had there been the slightest intimacy between the great nobleman and the poor author. Chesterfield had never seen Johnson eat. The letter in which the character is drawn opens with the epigram:</p>
		<p>Non amo te, Sabidi, nee possum dicere quare,<br/>
		Hoc tantum possum dicere, non amo te.<br/></p>
		<p>Chesterfield goes on to show ‘how it is possible not to love anybody, and yet not to know the reason why.⁠ ⁠… How often,’ he says, ‘have I, in the course of my life, found myself in this situation with regard to many of my acquaintance whom I have honoured and respected, without being able to love.’ He then instances the case of the man whom he describes as a respectable Hottentot. It is clear that he is writing of a man whom he knows well and who has some claim upon his affection. Twice he says that it is impossible to love him. The date of this letter is Feb. 28, 1751, more than three years after Johnson had for the last time waited in Chesterfield’s outward rooms. Moreover the same man is described in three other letters (Sept. 22, 1749; Nov. 1749; and May 27, 1753), and described as one with whom Chesterfield lived on terms of intimacy. In the two former of these letters he is called Mr. L. Lyttelton did not become Sir George Lyttelton till Sept. 14, 1751. He was raised to the peerage in 1757. Horace Walpole (<i>Reign of George III</i>, i. 256) says of him:⁠—‘His ignorance of mankind, want of judgment, with strange absence and awkwardness, involved him in mistakes and ridicule.’ Had Chesterfield’s letter been published when it was written, no one in all likelihood would have so much as dreamt that Johnson was aimed at. But it did not come before the world till twenty-three years later, when Johnson’s quarrel with Chesterfield was known to every one, when Johnson himself was at the very head of the literary world, and when his peculiarities had become a matter of general interest.</p>
		<p>[785] About four years after this time Gibbon, on his return to England, became intimate with Mr. and Mrs. Mallet. He thus wrote of them:⁠—‘The most useful friends of my father were the Mallets; they received me with civility and kindness at first on his account, and afterwards on my own; and (if I may use Lord Chesterfield’s words) I was soon <i>domesticated</i> in their house. Mr. Mallet, a name among the English poets, is praised by an unforgiving enemy for the ease and elegance of his conversation, and his wife was not destitute of wit or learning.’ Gibbon’s <i>Misc. Works</i>, i 115. The ‘unforgiving enemy’ was Johnson, who wrote (<i>Works</i>, viii. 468):⁠—‘His conversation was elegant and easy. The rest of his character may, without injury to his memory, sink into silence.’ Johnson once said:⁠—‘I have seldom met with a man whose colloquial ability exceeded that of Mallet.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, 1787, xi. 214. See <i>post</i>, March 27, 1772, and April 28, 1783; and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 10, 1773.</p>
		<p>[786] Johnson had never read Bolingbroke’s <i>Philosophy</i>. ‘I have never read Bolingbroke’s impiety,’ he said (<i>post</i>, under March 1, 1758). In the memorable sentence that he, notwithstanding, pronounced upon the author, he exposed himself to the retort which he had recorded in his <i>Life of Boerhaave</i> (<i>Works</i>, vi. 277). ‘As Boerhaave was sitting in a common boat, there arose a conversation among the passengers upon the impious and pernicious doctrine of Spinosa, which, as they all agreed, tends to the utter overthrow of all religion. Boerhaave sat and attended silently to this discourse for some time, till one of the company⁠ ⁠… instead of confuting the positions of Spinosa by argument began to give a loose to contumelious language and virulent invectives, which Boerhaave was so little pleased with, that at last he could not forbear asking him, whether he had ever read the author he declaimed against.’</p>
		<p>[787] Lord Shelburne said that ‘Bolingbroke was both a political and personal coward.’ Fitzmaurice’s <i>Shelburne</i>, i. 29.</p>
		<p>[788] It was in the summer of this year that Murphy became acquainted with Johnson. (See <i>post,</i> 1760.) ‘The first striking sentence that he heard from him was in a few days after the publication of Lord Bolingbroke’s posthumous works. Mr. Garrick asked him, “if he had seen them.” “Yes, I have seen them.” “What do you think of them?” “Think of them!” He made a long pause, and then replied: “Think of them! a scoundrel and a coward! A scoundrel who spent his life in charging a gun against Christianity; and a coward, who was afraid of hearing the report of his own gun; but left half-a-crown to a hungry Scotchman to draw the trigger after his death!” His mind, at this time strained and over laboured by constant exertion, called for an interval of repose and indolence. But indolence was the time of danger; it was then that his spirits, not employed abroad, turned with inward hostility against himself.’ Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 79, and Piozzi’s <i>Anec</i>., p. 235. Adam Smith, perhaps, had this saying of Johnson’s in mind, when in 1776 he refused the request of the dying Hume to edit after his death his <i>Dialogues on Natural Religion</i>. Hume wrote back:⁠—‘I think your scruples groundless. Was Mallet anywise hurt by his publication of Lord Bolingbroke? He received an office afterwards from the present King and Lord Bute, the most prudish man in the world.’ Smith did not yield. J. H. Burton’s <i>Hume</i>, ii. 491.</p>
		<p>[789] According to Horace Walpole (<i>Letters</i>, ii. 374), Pelham died of a surfeit. As Johnson says (<i>Works</i>, viii. 310):⁠—‘The death of great men is not always proportioned to the lustre of their lives. The death of Pope was imputed by some of his friends to a silver saucepan, in which it was his delight to heat potted lampreys.’ Fielding in <i>The Voyage to Lisbon</i> (<i>Works</i>, x. 201) records:⁠—‘I was at the worst on that memorable day when the public lost Mr. Pelham. From that day I began slowly, as it were, to draw my feet out of the grave.’ ‘ “I shall now have no more peace,” the King said with a sigh; being told of his Minister’s death.’ Walpole’s <i>George II</i>, i. 378.</p>
		<p>[790] ‘Thomas Warton, the younger brother of Dr. Warton, was a fellow of Trinity College, Oxford. He was Poetry Professor from 1758 to 1768. Mant’s <i>Warton</i>, i. xliv. In 1785 he was made Poet Laureate. <i>Ib</i>. lxxxiii. Mr. Mant, telling of an estrangement between Johnson and the Wartons, says that he had heard ‘on unquestionable authority that Johnson had lamented, with tears in his eyes, that the Wartons had not called on him for the last four years; and that he has been known to declare that Tom Warton was the only man of genius whom he knew without a heart.’ <i>Ib</i>. xxxix.</p>
		<p>[791] ‘Observations on Spenser’s Fairy Queen, the first edition of which was now just published.’ WARTON.</p>
		<p>[792] ‘Hughes published an edition of Spenser.’ WARTON. See Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii.476.</p>
		<p>[793] ‘His Dictionary.’ WARTON.</p>
		<p>[794] ‘He came to Oxford within a fortnight, and stayed about five weeks. He lodged at a house called Kettel hall, near Trinity College. But during this visit at Oxford, he collected nothing in the libraries for his Dictionary.’ WARTON.</p>
		<p>[795] Pitt this year described, in the House of Commons, a visit that he had paid to Oxford the summer before. He and his friends ‘were at the window of the Angel Inn; a lady was desired to sing <i>God save great George our King</i>. The chorus was re-echoed by a set of young lads drinking at a college over the way [Queen’s], but with additions of rank treason.’ Walpole’s <i>George II</i>, i. 413.</p>
		<p>[796] A Fellow of Pembroke College, of Johnson’s time, described the college servants as in ‘the state of servitude the most miserable that can be conceived amongst so many masters.’ He says that ‘the kicks and cuffs and bruises they submit to entitle them, when those who were displeased relent,’ to the compensation that is afforded by draughts of ale. ‘There is not a college servant, but if he have learnt to suffer, and to be officious, and be inclined to tipple, may forget his cares in a gallon or two of ale every day of his life.’ <i>Dr. Johnson:⁠—His Friends, &amp;c</i>., p. 45.</p>
		<p>[797] It was against the Butler that Johnson, in his college days, had written an epigram:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Quid mirum Maro quod digne<br/>
		 canit arma virumque,<br/>
		 Quid quod putidulum nostra<br/>
		 Camoena sonat?<br/>
		Limosum nobis Promus dat callidus<br/>
		 haustum;<br/>
		 Virgilio vires uva Falerna dedit.<br/>
		Carmina vis nostri scribant<br/>
		 meliora Poetae?<br/>
		 Ingenium jubeas purior haustus<br/>
		 alat.’<br/></p>
		<p>[798] Pope, <i>Eloisa to Abelard</i>, 1. 38.</p>
		<p>[799] Johnson or Warton misquoted the line. It stands:⁠—‘Mittit aromaticas vallis Saronica nubes.’ Husbands’s <i>Miscellany</i>, p. 112.</p>
		<p>[800] De Quincey (<i>Works</i>, xiii. 162), after saying that Johnson did not understand Latin ‘with the elaborate and circumstantial accuracy required for the editing critically of a Latin classic,’ continues:⁠—‘But if he had less than that, he also had more: he <i>possessed</i> that language in a way that no extent of mere critical knowledge could confer. He wrote it genially, not as one translating into it painfully from English, but as one using it for his original organ of thinking. And in Latin verse he expressed himself at times with the energy and freedom of a Roman.’</p>
		<p>[801] Mr. Jorden. See <i>ante</i>, p. 59.</p>
		<p>[802] Boswell (<i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 19, 1773) says that Johnson looked at the ruins at St. Andrew’s ‘with a strong indignation. I happened to ask where John Knox was buried. Dr. Johnson burst out, “I hope in the highway, I have been looking at his reformations.” ’</p>
		<p>[803] In Reasmus Philipps’s <i>Diary</i> it is recorded that in Pembroke College early in every November ‘was kept a great Gaudy [feast], when the Master dined in public, and the juniors (by an ancient custom they were obliged to observe) went round the fire in the hall.’ <i>Notes &amp; Queries</i>, 2nd S. x. 443.</p>
		<p>[804] Communicated by the Reverend Mr. Thomas Warton, who had the original. BOSWELL. In the imaginary college which was to be opened by <i>The Club</i> at St. Andrew’s, Chambers was to be the professor of the law of England. See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 25, 1773; also <i>post</i>, July 5, 1773 and March 30, 1774.</p>
		<p>[805] I presume she was a relation of Mr. Zachariah Williams, who died in his eighty-third year, July 12, 1755. When Dr. Johnson was with me at Oxford, in 1755, he gave to the Bodleian Library a thin quarto of twenty-one pages, a work in Italian, with an English translation on the opposite page. The English titlepage is this: ‘An Account of an Attempt to ascertain the Longitude at Sea, by an exact Variation of the Magnetical Needle, <abbr>etc.</abbr> By Zachariah Williams. London, printed for Dodsley, 1755.’ The English translation, from the strongest internal marks, is unquestionably the work of Johnson. In a blank leaf, Johnson has written the age, and time of death, of the authour Z. Williams, as I have said above. On another blank leaf, is pasted a paragraph from a newspaper, of the death and character of Williams, which is plainly written by Johnson. He was very anxious about placing this book in the Bodleian: and, for fear of any omission or mistake, he entered, in the great Catalogue, the title-page of it with his own hand.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>In this statement there is a slight mistake. The English account, which was written by Johnson, was the <i>original</i> the Italian was a <i>translation</i>, done by Baretti. See <i>post</i>, end of 1755. MALONE. Johnson has twice entered in his own hand that ‘Zachariah Williams, died July 12, 1755, in his eighty-third year,’ and also on the title-page that he was 82.</p>
		<p>[806] See <i>ante</i>, p. 133.</p>
		<p>[807] The compliment was, as it were, a mutual one. Mr. Wise urged Thomas Warton to get the degree conferred before the <i>Dictionary</i> was published. ‘It is in truth,’ he wrote, ‘doing ourselves more honour than him, to have such a work done by an Oxford hand, and so able a one too, and will show that we have not lost all regard for good letters, as has been too often imputed to us by our enemies.’ Wooll’s <i>Warton</i>, p. 228.</p>
		<p>[808] ‘In procuring him the degree of Master of Arts by diploma at Oxford.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[809] ‘Lately fellow of Trinity College, and at this time Radclivian librarian, at Oxford. He was a man of very considerable learning, and eminently skilled in Roman and Anglo-Saxon antiquities. He died in 1767.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[810] No doubt <i>The Rambler</i>.</p>
		<p>[811] ‘Collins (the poet) was at this time at Oxford, on a visit to Mr. Warton; but labouring under the most deplorable languor of body, and dejection of mind.’ WARTON. BOSWELL. Johnson, writing to Dr. Warton on March 8, 1754, thus speaks of Collins:-‘I knew him a few years ago full of hopes, and full of projects, versed in many languages, high in fancy, and strong in retention. This busy and forcible mind is now under the government of those who lately would not have been able to comprehend the least and most narrow of its designs.’ Wooll’s <i>Warton</i> 1. 219. Again, on Dec. 24, 1754:⁠—‘Poor dear Collins! Let me know whether you think it would give him pleasure if I should write to him. I have often been near his state, and therefore have it in great commiseration.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 229. Again, on April 15, 1756:⁠—‘That man is no common loss. The moralists all talk of the uncertainty of fortune, and the transitoriness of beauty: but it is yet more dreadful to consider that the powers of the mind are equally liable to change, that understanding may make its appearance and depart, that it may blaze and expire.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 239. See <i>post</i>, beginning of 1763.</p>
		<p>[812] ‘Of publishing a volume of observations on the best of Spenser’s works. It was hindered by my taking pupils in this College.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[813] ‘Young students of the lowest rank at Oxford are so called.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL. See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 28, 1773.</p>
		<p>[814] ‘His Dictionary.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[815] Johnson says (<i>Works</i>, viii. 403) that when Collins began to feel the approaches of his dreadful malady ‘with the usual weakness of men so diseased he eagerly snatched that temporary relief with which the table and the bottle flatter and seduce.’</p>
		<p>[816] ‘Petrarch, finding nothing in the word <i>eclogue</i> of rural meaning, supposed it to be corrupted by the copiers, and therefore called his own pastorals aeglogues, by which he meant to express the talk of goatherds, though it will mean only the talk of goats. This new name was adopted by subsequent writers.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 390.</p>
		<p>[817] ‘Of the degree at Oxford.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[818] This verse is from the long-lost <i>Bellerophon</i>, a tragedy by Euripides. It is preserved by Suidas. CHARLES BURNEY. ‘Alas! but wherefore alas? Man is born to sorrow.’</p>
		<p>[819]</p>
		<p>‘Sento venir per allegrezza un tuono<br/>
		Que frêmer l’aria, e rimbombar fa l’onrle:⁠—<br/>
		Odo di squille,’ <abbr>etc.</abbr><br/></p>
		<p><i>Orlando Furioso</i>. c. xlvi. s. 2.</p>
		<p>[820] ‘His degree had now past, according to the usual form, the surrages of the heads of Colleges; but was not yet finally granted by the University. It was carried without a single dissentient voice.’ WARTON. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[821] ‘On Spenser.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[822] Lord Eldon wrote of him:⁠—‘Poor Tom Warton! He was a tutor at Trinity; at the beginning of every term he used to send to his pupils to know whether they would <i>wish</i> to attend lecture that term.’ Twiss’s <i>Eldon</i>, iii. 302.</p>
		<p>[823] The fields north of Oxford.</p>
		<p>[824] ‘Of the degree.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[825] ‘Principal of St. Mary Hall at Oxford. He brought with him the diploma from Oxford.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL. Dr. King (<i>Anec</i>. p. 196) says that he was one of the Jacobites who were presented to the Pretender when, in September 1750, he paid a stealthy visit to England. The Pretender in 1783 told Sir Horace Mann that he was in London in that very month and year and had met fifty of his friends, among whom was the Earl of Westmoreland, the future Chancellor of the University of Oxford. Mahon’s <i>England</i>, iv. II. Hume places the visit in 1753. Burton’s <i>Hume</i>, ii. 462. See also in Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, the account of the Young Pretender. In 1754, writes Lord Shelburne, ‘Dr. King in his speech upon opening the Radcliffe Library at Oxford, before a full theatre introduced three times the word <i>Redeat</i>, pausing each time for a considerable space, during which the most unbounded applause shook the theatre, which was filled with a vast body of peers, members of parliament, and men of property. Soon after the rebellion [of 1745], speaking of the Duke of Cumberland, he described him as a man, <i>qui timet omnia prater Deum</i>. I presented this same Dr. King to George III. in 1760.’ Fitzmaurice’s <i>Shelburne</i>, i. 35.</p>
		<p>[826] ‘I suppose Johnson means that my <i>kind intention</i> of being the <i>first</i> to give him the good news of the degree being granted was <i>frustrated</i>, because Dr. King brought it before my intelligence arrived.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[827] Dr. Huddesford, President of Trinity College.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[828] Extracted from the Convocation-Register, Oxford. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[829] The Earl of Arran, ‘the last male of the illustrious House of Ormond,’ was the third Chancellor in succession that that family had given to the University. The first of the three, the famous Duke of Ormond, had, on his death in 1688, been succeeded by his grandson, the young Duke. (Macaulay’s <i>England</i>, iii. 159). He, on his impeachment and flight from England in 1715, was succeeded by his brother, the Earl of Arran. Richardson, writing in 1754 (<i>Carres</i>. ii. 198), said of the University, ‘Forty years ago it chose a Chancellor in despite of the present reigning family, whose whole merit was that he was the brother of a perjured, yet weak, rebel.’ On Arran’s death in 1758, the Earl of Westmoreland, ‘old dull Westmoreland’ as Walpole calls him (<i>Letters</i>, i. 290), was elected. It was at his installation that Johnson clapped his hands till they were sore at Dr. King’s speech (<i>post</i>, 1759). ‘I hear,’ wrote Walpole of what he calls <i>the coronation at Oxford</i>, ‘my Lord Westmoreland’s own retinue was all be-James’d with true-blue ribands.’ <i>Letters</i>, iii. 237. It is remarkable that this nobleman, who in early life was a Whig, had commanded ‘the body of troops which George I. had been obliged to send to Oxford, to teach the University the only kind of passive obedience which they did not approve.’ Walpole’s <i>George II</i>, iii. 167.</p>
		<p>[830] The original is in my possession, BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[831] We may conceive what a high gratification it must have been to Johnson to receive his diploma from the hands of the great Dr. KING, whose principles were so congenial with his own. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[832] Johnson here alludes, I believe, to the charge of disloyalty brought against the University at the time of the famous contested election for Oxfordshire in 1754. A copy of treasonable verses was found, it was said, near the market-place in Oxford, and the grand jury made a presentment thereon. ‘We must add,’ they concluded, ‘that it is the highest aggravation of this crime to have a libel of a nature so false and scandalous, published in a famous University, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxiv. 339. A reward of £200 was offered in the <i>London Gazette</i> for the detection of the writer or publisher,’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 377.</p>
		<p>[833] A single letter was a single piece of paper; a second piece of paper, however small, or any inclosure constituted a double letter; it was not the habit to prepay the postage. The charge for a single letter to Oxford at this time was three-pence, which was gradually increased till in 1812 it was eight-pence. <i>Penny Cyclo</i>. xviii. 455.</p>
		<p>[834] ‘The words in Italicks are allusions to passages in Mr. Warton’s poem, called <i>The Progress of Discontent</i>, now lately published.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>‘And now intent on new designs,<br/>
		Sighs for a fellowship⁠—and fines.<br/></p>
		<p>* * * * *</p>
		<p>These fellowships are pretty things,<br/>
		We live indeed like petty kings.<br/></p>
		<p>* * * * *</p>
		<p>And ev’ry night I went to bed,<br/>
		Without a Modus in my head.’<br/></p>
		<p>Warton’s <i>Poems</i>, ii. 192.</p>
		<p>For <i>modus</i> and <i>fines</i> see <i>post</i>, April 25, 1778.</p>
		<p>[835] Lucretius, i. 23</p>
		<p>[836]</p>
		<p>‘Hence ye prophane; I hate ye all,<br/>
		Both the Great Vulgar and the Small.’<br/></p>
		<p>Cowley’s <i>Imit. of Horace</i>, Odes, iii. 1.</p>
		<p>[837] <i>Journal Britannique</i>. It was to Maty that Gibbon submitted the manuscript of his first work. Gibbon’s <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 123.</p>
		<p>[838] Maty, as Prof. de Morgan pointed out, had in the autumn of 1755 been guilty of ‘wilful suppression of the circumstances of Johnson’s attack on Lord Chesterfield.’ In an article in his <i>Journal</i> he regrets the absence from the <i>Dictionary</i> of the <i>Plan</i>. ‘Elle eût épargné à l’auteur la composition d’une nouvelle préface, qui ne contient qu’en partie les mêmes choses, et qu’on est tenté de regarder comme destinée à faire perdre de vue quelques-unes des obligations que M. Johnson avait contractées, et le Mécène qu’il avait choisi.’ <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 2nd S. iv. 341.</p>
		<p>[839] He left London in 1751 and returned to it in 1760. <i>Memoirs of Dr. Barney</i>, i. 85, 133.</p>
		<p>[840] See <i>ante</i>, p. 183, note 2.</p>
		<p>[841] Sir John Hawkins, p. 341, inserts two notes as having passed formally between Andrew Millar and Johnson, to the above effect. I am assured this was not the case. In the way of incidental remark it was a pleasant play of raillery. To have deliberately written notes in such terms would have been morose. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[842] ‘Talking one day of the patronage the great sometimes affect to give to literature and literary men, “Andrew Millar,” says Johnson, “is the Maecenas of the age.” ’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i> (1787), xi. 200. Horace Walpole, writing on May 18, 1749 (<i>Letters</i> ii. 163), says:⁠—‘Millar the bookseller has done very generously by Fielding; finding <i>Tom Jones</i>, for which he had given him six hundred pounds, sell so greatly, he has since given him another hundred.’ Hume writing on July 6, 1759, says:⁠—‘Poor Andrew Millar is declared bankrupt; his debts amount to above £40,000, and it is said his creditors will not get above three shillings in the pound. All the world allows him to have been diligent and industrious; but his misfortunes are ascribed to the extravagance of his wife, a very ordinary case in this city.’ J. H. Burton’s <i>Hume</i>, ii. 64. He must soon have recovered his position, for Dr. A. Carlyle (Auto. p. 434) met Millar at Harrogate in 1763. In the inn were several baronets, and great squires, members of parliament, who paid Millar civility for the use of his two newspapers which came to him by every post. ‘Yet when he appeared in the morning, in his well-worn suit of clothes, they could not help calling him Peter Pamphlet; for the generous patron of Scotch authors, with his city wife and her niece, were sufficiently ridiculous when they came into good company.’ Mr. Croker (<i>Boswell</i>, p. 630) says that Millar was the bookseller described by Johnson, <i>post</i>, April 24, 1779. as ‘habitually and equably drunk.’ He is, I think, mistaken.</p>
		<p>[843] His <i>Dictionary</i>. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[844] ‘A translation of Apollonius Rhodius was now intended by Mr. Warton.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[845] Kettel Hall is an ancient tenement built about the year 1615 by Dr. Ralph Kettel, President of Trinity College, for the accommodation of commoners of that Society. It adjoins the College; and was a few years ago converted into a private house. MALONE.</p>
		<p>[846] ‘At Ellsfield, a village three miles from Oxford.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[847] It was published on April 15, 1755, in two vols. folio, price £4 10_s_. bound. Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 51.</p>
		<p>[848] ‘Booksellers concerned in his <i>Dictionary</i>.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL. ‘June 12, Mr. Paul Knapton, bookseller. June 18, Thos. Longman, Esq., bookseller.’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>., xxv. 284. The ‘Esq.’ perhaps is a sign that even so early as 1755 the Longmans ranked higher than most of their brethren.</p>
		<p>[849] 1. <i>Own</i> not in the original. Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 36.</p>
		<p>[850] ‘I have not always executed my own scheme, or satisfied my own expectations.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, p. 41.</p>
		<p>[851] In the <i>Plan of an English Dictionary</i> (<i>ib</i>. p. 16) Johnson, writing of ‘the word <i>perfection</i>‘ says:⁠—‘Though in its philosophical and exact sense it can be of little use among human beings, it is often so much degraded from its original signification, that the academicians have inserted in their work, <i>the perfection of a language</i>, and, with a little more licentiousness, might have prevailed on themselves to have added <i>the perfection of a Dictionary</i>.’ In the Preface to the fourth edition he writes:⁠—‘He that undertakes to compile a Dictionary undertakes that, which if it comprehends the full extent of his design, he knows himself unable to perform.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 52.</p>
		<p>[852] <i>Ib</i>. p. 51.</p>
		<p>[853] See <i>post</i>, under May 19, 1777.</p>
		<p>[854] See <i>ante</i>, p. 186, note 5.</p>
		<p>[855] He defines both <i>towards the wind</i>. The definitions remain unchanged in the fourth edition, the last corrected by Johnson, and also in the third edition of the abridgment, though this abridgment was made by him. <i>Pastern</i> also remains unaltered in this latter edition. In the fourth edition he corrected it. ‘The drawback of his character,’ wrote Sir Joshua Reynolds, ‘is entertaining prejudices on very slight foundations; giving an opinion, perhaps, first at random, but from its being contradicted he thinks himself obliged always to support it, or, if he cannot support, still not to acquiesce. Of this I remember an instance of a defect or forgetfulness in his <i>Dictionary</i>. I asked him how he came not to correct it in the second edition. “No,” says he, “they made so much of it that I would not flatter them by altering it.” ’ Taylor’s <i>Reynolds</i>, ii. 461.</p>
		<p>[856] In his Preface (<i>Works</i>, v. 50) he anticipated errors and laughter. ‘A few wild blunders and risible absurdities, from which no work of such multiplicity was ever free, may for a time furnish folly with laughter and harden ignorance into contempt’ In a letter written nearly thirty years later he said:⁠—‘Dictionaries are like watches, the worst is better than none, and the best cannot be expected to go quite true.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 406.</p>
		<p>[857] See <i>post</i>, under July 20, 1762.</p>
		<p>[858] ‘Network. Anything reticulated or decussated, at equal distances, with interstices between the intersections.’ Reticulated is defined ‘Made of network; formed with interstitial vacuities.’</p>
		<p>[859] ‘That part of my work on which I expect malignity most frequently to fasten is the <i>Explanation</i>.⁠ ⁠… Such is the fate of hapless lexicography, that not only darkness, but light, impedes and distresses it; things may be not only too little, but too much known, to be happily illustrated.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 34.</p>
		<p>[860] In the original, ‘to admit <i>a</i> definition.’ <i>Ib</i>.</p>
		<p>[861] In the original, ‘<i>drier.’ Ib</i>. 38.</p>
		<p>[862] ‘Tory. (A cant term derived, I suppose, from an Irish word signifying a savage.) One who adheres to the ancient constitution of the state, and the apostolical hierarchy of the Church of England: opposed to a <i>whig</i>.’</p>
		<p>[863] ‘Whig. The name of a faction.’ Lord Marchmont (<i>post</i>, May 12, 1778) said that ‘Johnson was the first that brought Whig and Tory into a dictionary.’ In this he was mistaken. In the fourth edition of Dr. Adam Littleton’s <i>Linguae Latinae Liber Dictionarius</i>, published in 1703, <i>Whig</i> is translated <i>Homo fanaticus, factiosus; Whiggism, Enthusiasmus, Perduellio; Tory, bog-trotter or Irish robber, Praedo Hibernicus; Tory</i> opposed to whig, <i>Regiarum partium assertor</i>. These definitions are not in the first edition, published in 1678. <i>A pensioner</i> or <i>bride</i> [bribed] <i>person</i> is rendered _Mercenarius.</p>
		<p>[864] ‘Pension. An allowance made to any one without an equivalent. In England it is generally understood to mean pay given to a state hireling for treason to his country.’ <i>Pensioner</i> is defined as ‘One who is supported by an allowance paid at the will of another; a dependant.’ These definitions remain in the fourth edition, corrected by Johnson in 1773.</p>
		<p>[865] ‘Oats. A grain which in England is generally given to horses, but in Scotland supports the people.’ See <i>post</i>, March 23, 1776, and March 21, 1783. ‘Did you ever hear,’ wrote Sir Walter Scott, ‘of Lord Elibank’s reply when Johnson’s famous definition of oats was pointed out first to him. “Very true, and where will you find such <i>men</i> and such <i>horses</i>?” ’ Croker’s <i>Carres</i>, ii. 35.</p>
		<p>[866] He thus defines Excise: ‘A hateful tax levied upon commodities, and adjudged not by the common judges of property, but wretches hired by those to whom Excise is paid.’ The Commissioners of Excise being offended by this severe reflection, consulted Mr. Murray, then Attorney General, to know whether redress could be legally obtained. I wished to have procured for my readers a copy of the opinion which he gave, and which may now be justly considered as history; but the mysterious secrecy of office, it seems, would not permit it. I am, however, informed, by very good authority, that its import was, that the passage might be considered as actionable; but that it would be more prudent in the board not to prosecute. Johnson never made the smallest alteration in this passage. We find he still retained his early prejudice against Excise; for in <i>The Idler</i>, No. 65, there is the following very extraordinary paragraph: ‘The authenticity of <i>Clarendon’s</i> history, though printed with the sanction of one of the first Universities of the world, had not an unexpected manuscript been happily discovered, would, with the help of factious credulity, have been brought into question by the two lowest of all human beings, a Scribbler for a party, and a Commissioner of Excise.’⁠—The persons to whom he alludes were Mr. John Oldmixon, and George Ducket, Esq. BOSWELL. Mr. Croker obtained a copy of the case.</p>
		<p>‘<i>Case for the opinion of Mr. Attorney-General</i>.</p>
		<p>‘Mr. Samuel Johnson has lately published “A Dictionary of the English<br/>
		Language,” in which are the following words:⁠—<br/></p>
		<p>‘ “EXCISE, <i>n.s</i>. A hateful tax levied upon commodities and adjudged not by the common judges of property, but by wretches hired by those to whom excise is paid.”</p>
		<p>‘<i>The author’s definition being observed by the Commissioners of Excise, they desire the favour of your opinion</i>. “Qu. Whether it will not be considered as a libel, and if so, whether it is not proper to proceed against the author, printers, and publishers thereof, or any and which of them, by information, or how otherwise?”</p>
		<p>‘I am of opinion that it is a libel. But under all the circumstances, I should think it better to give him an opportunity of altering his definition; and, in case he do not, to threaten him with an information.</p>
		<p>‘29th Nov. 1755. W. Murray.’ In one of the Parl. Debates of 1742 Johnson makes Pitt say that ‘it is probable that we shall detect bribery descending through a long subordination of wretches combined against the public happiness, from the prime minister surrounded by peers and officers of state to the exciseman dictating politics amidst a company of mechanics whom he debauches at the public expense, and lists in the service of his master with the taxes which he gathers.’ <i>Parl. Hist</i>., xii. <i>570</i>. See <i>ante</i>, p. 36, note 5.</p>
		<p>[867] He defined <i>Favourite</i> as ‘One chosen as a companion by a superiour; a mean wretch, whose whole business is by any means to please:’ and <i>Revolution</i> as ‘change in the state of a government or country. It is used among us <i>kat hexochaen</i> for the change produced by the admission of King William and Queen Mary.’ For these definitions Wilkes attacked him in <i>The North Briton</i>, No. xii. In the fourth edition Johnson gives a second definition of <i>patriot</i>:⁠—‘It is sometimes used for a factious disturber of the government.’ Premier and <i>prime minister</i> are not defined. <i>Post</i>, April 14, 1775. See also <i>ante</i>, p. 264 note, for the definition of <i>patron</i>; and <i>post</i>, April 28, 1783 for that of <i>alias</i>.</p>
		<p>[868] ‘There have been great contests in the Privy Council about the trial of the Vice-Chancellor of Oxford [on a charge of Jacobitism]: Lord Gower pressed it extremely. He asked the Attorney-General his opinion, who told him the evidence did not appear strong enough. Lord Gower said:⁠—“Mr. Attorney, you seem to be very lukewarm for your party.” He replied:⁠—“My Lord, I never was lukewarm for my party, <i>nor ever was but of one party</i>!” ’ Walpole’s <i>Letters</i>, ii. 140. Mr. Croker assumes that Johnson here ‘attempted a pun, and wrote the name (as pronounced) Go’er. Johnson was very little likely to pun, for ‘he had a great contempt for that species of wit.’ <i>Post</i>, April 30, 1773.</p>
		<p>[869] Boswell omits the salutation which follows this definition:</p>
		<p>Chair Ithakae met haethla, met halgea pikra Haspasios teon oudas ikanomai.</p>
		<p>‘Dr. Johnson,’ says Miss Burney, ‘inquired if I had ever yet visited <i>Grub-street</i>, but was obliged to restrain his anger when I answered “No;” because he had never paid his respects to it himself. “However,” says he, “you and I, Burney, will go together; we have a very good right to go, so we’ll visit the mansions of our progenitors, and take up our own freedom together.” ’ Mme. D’Arblay’s <i>Diary</i>, i. 415.</p>
		<p>[870] Lord Bolingbroke had said (<i>Works</i>, in. 317): ‘I approve the devotion of a studious man at Christ Church, who was overheard in his oratory entering into a detail with God, and acknowledging the divine goodness in furnishing the world with makers of dictionaries. These men court fame, as well as their betters, by such means as God has given them to acquire it. They deserve encouragement while they continue to compile, and neither affect wit, nor presume to reason.’ Johnson himself in <i>The Adventurer</i>, No. 39, had in 1753 described a class of men who ‘employed their minds in such operations as required neither celerity nor strength, in the low drudgery of collating copies, comparing authorities, digesting dictionaries,’ <abbr>etc.</abbr> Lord Monboddo, in his <i>Origin of Language</i>, v. 273, says that ‘J. C. Scaliger called the makers of dictionaries <i>les portefaix de la république des lettres</i>.’</p>
		<p>[871] Great though his depression was, yet he could say with truth in his Preface:⁠—‘Despondency has never so far prevailed as to depress me to negligence.’ <i>Works</i>, v. 43.</p>
		<p>[872] <i>Ib</i>. p. 51. ‘In the preface the author described the difficulties with which he had been left to struggle so forcibly and pathetically that the ablest and most malevolent of all the enemies of his fame, Horne Tooke, never could read that passage without tears.’ Macaulay’s <i>Misc. Writings</i>, p. 382. It is in <i>A Letter to John Dunning, Esq</i>. (p. 56) that Horne Tooke, or rather Horne, wrote:⁠—‘I could never read his preface without shedding a tear.’ See <i>post</i>, May 13, 1778. On Oct. 10, 1779, Boswell told Johnson, that he had been ‘agreeably mistaken’ in saying:⁠—‘What would it avail me in this gloom of solitude?’</p>
		<p>[873] It appears even by many a passage in the Preface⁠—one of the proudest pieces of writing in our language. ‘The chief glory,’ he writes, ‘of every people arises from its authors: whether I shall add anything by my own writings to the reputation of English literature must be left to time.’ ‘I deliver,’ he says, ‘my book to the world with the spirit of a man that has endeavoured well.⁠ ⁠… In this work, when it shall be found that much is omitted, let it not be forgotten that much likewise is performed; and though no book was ever spared out of tenderness to the author, and the world is little solicitous to know whence proceeded the faults of that which it condemns; yet it may gratify curiosity to inform it, that the <i>English Dictionary</i> was written with little assistance of the learned, and without any patronage of the great; not in the soft obscurities of retirement, or under the shelter of academick bowers, but amidst inconvenience and distraction, in sickness and in sorrow.’ <i>Works</i>, v. pp. 49⁠–⁠51. Thomas Warton wrote to his brother:⁠—‘I fear his preface will disgust by the expressions of his consciousness of superiority, and of his contempt of patronage.’ Wooll’s <i>Warton</i>, p. 231.</p>
		<p>[874] That praise was slow in coming is shown by his letter to Mr. Burney, written two years and eight months after the publication of the <i>Dictionary</i>. ‘Your praise,’ he wrote, ‘was welcome, not only because I believe it was sincere, but because praise has been very scarce.⁠ ⁠… Yours is the only letter of good-will that I have received; though, indeed, I am promised something of that sort from Sweden.’ <i>Post</i>, Dec. 24, 1757.</p>
		<p>[875] In the <i>Edinburgh Review</i> (No. 1, 1755)⁠—a periodical which only lasted two years⁠—there is a review by Adam Smith of Johnson’s <i>Dictionary</i>. Smith admits the ‘very extraordinary merit’ of the author. ‘The plan,’ however, ‘is not sufficiently grammatical.’ To explain what he intends, he inserts ‘an article or two from Mr. Johnson, and opposes to them the same articles, digested in the manner which we would have wished him to have followed.’ He takes the words <i>but</i> and <i>humour</i>. One part of his definition of humour is curious⁠—‘something which comes upon a man by fits, which he can neither command nor restrain, and which is not perfectly consistent with true politeness.’ This essay has not, I believe, been reprinted.</p>
		<p>[876] She died in March 1752; the <i>Dictionary</i> was published in April 1755.</p>
		<p>[877] In the Preface he writes (<i>Works</i>, v. 49):⁠—‘Much of my life has been lost under the pressures of disease; much has been trifled away; and much has always been spent in provision for the day that was passing over me.’ In his fine Latin poem [Greek: Inothi seauton] ‘he has left,’ says Mr. Murphy (<i>Life</i>, p. 82), ‘a picture of himself drawn with as much truth, and as firm a hand, as can be seen in the portraits of Hogarth or Sir Joshua Reynolds.’ He wrote it after revising and enlarging his <i>Dictionary</i>, and he sadly asks himself what is left for him to do.</p>
		<p>Me, pensi immunis cum jam mihi reddor, inertis<br/>
		Desidiae sors dura manet, graviorque labore<br/>
		Tristis et atra quies, et tardae taedia vitae.<br/>
		Nascuntur curis curae, vexatque dolorum<br/>
		Importuna cohors, vacuae mala somnia mentis.<br/>
		Nunc clamosa juvant nocturnae gaudia mensae,<br/>
		Nunc loca sola placent; frustra te, somne, recumbens,<br/>
		Alme voco, impatiens noctis, metuensque diei.<br/>
		Omnia percurro trepidus, circum omnia lustro,<br/>
		Si qua usquam pateat melioris semita vitae,<br/>
		Nec quid agam invenio.⁠ ⁠… <br/>
		Quid faciam? tenebrisne pigram damnare senectam<br/>
		Restat? an accingar studiis gravioribus audax?<br/>
		Aut, hoc si nimium est, tandem nova lexica poscam?<br/></p>
		<p>Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, i. 164.</p>
		<p>[878] A few weeks before his wife’s death he wrote in <i>The Rambler</i> (No. 196):⁠—‘The miseries of life would be increased beyond all human power of endurance, if we were to enter the world with the same opinions as we carry from it.’ He would, I think, scarcely have expressed himself so strongly towards his end. Though, as Dr. Maxwell records, in his <i>Collectanea</i> (<i>post</i>, 1770), ‘he often used to quote with great pathos those fine lines of Virgil:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Optima quaeque dies miseris mortalibus aevi<br/>
		 Prima fugit, <abbr>etc.</abbr>’<br/></p>
		<p>yet he owned, and the pages of Boswell amply testify, that it was in the latter period of his life that he had his happiest days.</p>
		<p>[879] <i>Macbeth</i>, Act ii. sc. 3.</p>
		<p>[880] In the third edition, published in 1773, he left out the words <i>perhaps never</i>, and added the following paragraph:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘It sometimes begins middle or final syllables in words compounded, as <i>block-head</i>, or derived from the Latin, as <i>compre-hended</i>.’ BOSWELL. In the <i>Abridgment</i>, which was published some years earlier, after <i>never</i> is added ‘except in compounded words.’</p>
		<p>[881] It was published in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for April, 1755 (xxv. 190), just below the advertisement of the <i>Dictionary</i>.</p>
		<p>[882] In the original, ‘Milton and Shakespeare.’</p>
		<p>[883] The number of the French Academy employed in settling their language. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[884] The maximum reward offered by a bill passed in 1714 was £20,000 for a method that determined the longitude at sea to half a degree of a great circle, or thirty geographical miles. For less accuracy smaller rewards were offered. <i>Ann. Reg</i>. viii. 114. In 1765 John Harrison received £7,500 for his chronometer; he had previously been paid £2,500; <i>ib</i>. 128. In this Act of Parliament ‘the legislature never contemplated the invention of a <i>method</i>, but only of the means of making existing methods accurate.’ <i>Penny Cyclo</i>. xiv. 139. An old sea-faring man wrote to Swift that he had found out the longitude. The Dean replied ‘that he never knew but two projectors, one of whom ruined himself and his family, and the other hanged himself; and desired him to desist lest one or other might happen to him.’ Swift’s <i>Works</i> (1803), xvii. 157. In <i>She Stoops to Conquer</i> (Act i. sc. 2), when Tony ends his directions to the travellers by telling them⁠—‘coming to the farmer’s barn you are to turn to the right, and then to the left, and then to the right about again, till you find out the old mill;’ Marlow exclaims: ‘Zounds, man! we could as soon find out the longitude.’</p>
		<p>[885] Joseph Baretti, a native of Piedmont, came to England in 1750 (see Preface to his <i>Account of Italy</i>, p. ix). He died in May, 1789. In his <i>Journey from London to Genoa</i> (ii. 276), he says that his father was one of the two architects of the King of Sardinia. Shortly after his death a writer in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. (Iix. 469, 570), who was believed to be Vincent, Dean of Westminster, thus wrote of him:⁠—‘Though his severity had created him enemies, his talents, conversation, and integrity had conciliated the regard of many valuable friends and acquaintance. His manners were apparently rough, but not unsocial. His integrity was in every period of his distresses constant and unimpeached. His wants he never made known but in the last extremity. He and Johnson had been friends in distress. One evening, when they had agreed to go to the tavern, a foreigner in the streets, by a specious tale of distress, emptied the Doctor’s purse of the last half-guinea it contained. When the reckoning came, what was his surprise upon his recollecting that his purse was totally exhausted. Baretti had fortunately enough to answer the demand, and has often declared that it was impossible for him not to reverence a man, who could give away all that he was worth, without recollecting his own distress.’ See <i>post</i>, Oct. 20, 1769.</p>
		<p>[886] See note by Mr. Warton, <i>ante</i>, p. 275. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[887] ‘On Saturday the 12th, about twelve at night, died Mr. Zachariah Williams, in his eighty-third year, after an illness of eight months, in full possession of his mental faculties. He has been long known to philosophers and seamen for his skill in magnetism, and his proposal to ascertain the longitude by a peculiar system of the variation of the compass. He was a man of industry indefatigable, of conversation inoffensive, patient of adversity and disease, eminently sober, temperate, and pious; and worthy to have ended life with better fortune.’ BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[888] Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 49. Malone, in a note on this passage, says:⁠—‘Johnson appears to have been in this year in great pecuniary distress, having been arrested for debt; on which occasion Richardson became his surety.’ He refers to the following letter in the <i>Richardson Corres</i>, v. 285:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘To MR. RICHARDSON.</p>
		<p>‘Tuesday, Feb. 19, 1756.</p>
		<h5>‘DEAR SIR,</h5>
		<p>‘I return you my sincerest thanks for the favour which you were pleased to do me two nights ago. Be pleased to accept of this little book, which is all that I have published this winter. The inflammation is come again into my eye, so that I can write very little. I am, Sir, your most obliged and most humble servant,</p>
		<h5>‘SAM. JOHNSON.’</h5>
		<p>The ‘little book’ is not (as Mr. Croker suggests) Williams’s <i>Longitude</i>, for it was published in Jan. 1755 (<i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxv. 47); but the <i>Abridgment of the Dictionary</i>, which was advertised in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for Jan. 1756. Murphy says (<i>Life</i>, p. 86), that he has before him a letter in Johnson’s handwriting, which shows the distress of the man who had written <i>The Rambler</i>, and finished the great work of his <i>Dictionary</i>. It is directed to Mr. Richardson, and is as follows:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘SIR⁠—I am obliged to entreat your assistance. I am now under an arrest for five pounds eighteen shillings. Mr. Strahan, from whom I should have received the necessary help in this case, is not at home, and I am afraid of not finding Mr. Millar. If you will be so good as to send me this sum, I will very gratefully repay you, and add it to all former obligations. I am, Sir, your most obedient and most humble servant,</p>
		<h5>‘SAMUEL JOHNSON.</h5>
		<p id="id03681" style="margin-left: 1%; margin-right: 1%">‘Gough-Square, 16 March.’</p>
		<p>In the margin of this letter there is a memorandum in these words:⁠—‘March 16, 1756. Sent six guineas. Witness, Win. Richardson.’ In the <i>European Mag</i>., vii. 54, there is the following anecdote recorded, for which Steevens most likely was the authority:⁠—‘I remember writing to Richardson’ said Johnson, ‘from a spunging-house; and was so sure of my deliverance through his kindness and liberality, that before his reply was brought I knew I could afford to joke with the rascal who had me in custody, and did so over a pint of adulterated wine, for which at that instant I had no money to pay.’ It is very likely that this anecdote has no other foundation than Johnson’s second letter to Richardson, which is dated, not from a spunging-house, but from his own residence. What kind of fate awaited a man who was thrown into prison for debt is shown by the following passage in Wesley’s <i>Journal</i> (ii. 267), dated Feb. 3, 1753:⁠—‘I visited one in the Marshalsea prison, a nursery of all manner of wickedness. O shame to man, that there should be such a place, such a picture of hell upon earth!’ A few days later he writes:⁠—‘I visited as many more as I could. I found some in their cells under ground; others in their garrets, half starved both with cold and hunger, added to weakness and pain.’</p>
		<p>[889] In a Debate on the Copyright Bill on May 16, 1774, Governor Johnstone said:⁠—‘It had been urged that Dr. Johnson had received an after gratification from the booksellers who employed him to compile his <i>Dictionary</i>. He had in his hand a letter from Dr. Johnson, which he read, in which the doctor denied the assertion, but declared that his employers fulfilled their bargain with him, and that he was satisfied.’ <i>Parl. Hist</i>. xvii. 1105.</p>
		<p>[890] He more than once attacked them. Thus in <i>An Appeal to the Public</i>, which he wrote for the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. in 1739 (<i>Works</i>, v. 348), he said:⁠—‘Nothing is more criminal in the opinion of many of them, than for an author to enjoy more advantage from his own works than they are disposed to allow him. This is a principle so well established among them, that we can produce some who threatened printers with their highest displeasure, for having dared to print books for those that wrote them.’ In the <i>Life of Savage</i> (<i>ib</i>. viii. 132), written in 1744, he writes of the ‘avarice, by which the booksellers are frequently incited to oppress that genius by which they are supported.’ In the <i>Life of Dryden</i> (<i>ib</i>. vii. 299), written in 1779, he speaks of an improvement. ‘The general conduct of traders was much less liberal in those times than in our own; their views were narrower, and their manners grosser. To the mercantile ruggedness of that race the delicacy of the poet was sometimes exposed.’</p>
		<p>[891] <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, p. 40 [25]. BOSWELL. Johnson wrote to Miss Boothby on Dec. 30, 1755:⁠—‘If I turn my thoughts upon myself, what do I perceive but a poor helpless being, reduced by a blast of wind to weakness and misery?⁠ ⁠… Mr. Fitzherbert sent to-day to offer me some wine; the people about me say I ought to accept it. I shall therefore be obliged to him if he will send me a bottle.’ <i>Pioszi Letters</i>, ii. 393.</p>
		<p>[892] <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, p. 27. BOSWELL</p>
		<p>[893] See <i>post</i>, April 6, 1775. Kit Smart, once a Fellow of Pembroke Hall, Cambridge, ended his life in the King’s Bench Prison; ‘where he had owed to a small subscription, of which Dr. Burney was at the head, a miserable pittance beyond the prison allowance. In his latest letter to Dr. Burney, he passionately pleaded for a fellow-sufferer, “whom I myself,” he impressively adds, “have already assisted according to my willing poverty.” In another letter to the same friend he said:⁠—“I bless God for your good nature, which please to take for a receipt.” ’ <i>Memoirs of Dr. Burney</i>, i. 205, 280.</p>
		<p>[894] In this Essay Johnson writes (<i>Works</i>, v. 315):⁠—‘I think there is room to question whether a great part of mankind has yet been informed that life is sustained by the fruits of the earth. I was once, indeed, provoked to ask a lady of great eminence for genius, “Whether she knew of what bread is made.” ’</p>
		<p>[895] In <i>The Universal Visiter</i> this Essay is entitled, ‘Reflections on the Present State of Literature;’ and in Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 355, ‘A Project for the Employment of Authors.’ The whole world, he says, is turning author. Their number is so large that employment must be found for them. ‘There are some reasons for which they may seem particularly qualified for a military life. They are used to suffer want of every kind; they are accustomed to obey the word of command from their patrons and their booksellers; they have always passed a life of hazard and adventure, uncertain what may be their state on the next day.⁠ ⁠… There are some whom long depression under supercilious patrons has so humbled and crushed, that they will never have steadiness to keep their ranks. But for these men there may be found fifes and drums, and they will be well enough pleased to inflame others to battle, if they are not obliged to fight themselves.’</p>
		<p>[896] He added it also to his <i>Life of Pope</i>.</p>
		<p>[897] ‘This employment,’ wrote Murphy (<i>Life</i>, p. 88), ‘engrossed but little of Johnson’s time. He resigned himself to indolence, took no exercise, rose about two, and then received the visits of his friends. Authors long since forgotten waited on him as their oracle, and he gave responses in the chair of criticism. He listened to the complaints, the schemes, and the hopes and fears of a crowd of inferior writers, “who,” he said, in the words of Roger Ascham, “lived, men knew not how, and died obscure, men marked not when.” He believed, that he could give a better history of Grub Street than any man living. His house was filled with a succession of visitors till four or five in the evening. During the whole time he presided at his tea-table.’ In <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 145, Johnson takes the part of these inferior writers:⁠—‘a race of beings equally obscure and equally indigent, who, because their usefulness is less obvious to vulgar apprehensions, live unrewarded and die unpitied, and who have been long exposed to insult without a defender, and to censure without an apologist.’</p>
		<p>[898] In this essay (<i>Works</i>, vi. 129) Johnson describes Canada as a ‘region of desolate sterility,’ ‘a cold, uncomfortable, uninviting region, from which nothing but furs and fish were to be had.’</p>
		<p>[899] The bill of 1756 that he considers passed through the Commons but was rejected by the Lords. It is curious as showing the comparative population of the different counties, Devonshire was to furnish 3200 men⁠—twice as many as Lancashire. Essex, Kent, Norfolk and Suffolk were each to furnish 1920 men; Lancashire, Surrey, Sussex, and Wiltshire 1600: Durham and Bedfordshire 800. From the three Ridings of Yorkshire 4800 were to be raised. The men were to be exercised every Sunday before and after service. <i>The Literary Magazine</i>, p. 58.</p>
		<p>[900] In this paper are found the forcible words, ‘The desperate remedy of desperate distress,’ which have been used since by orators. <i>Ib</i>. p. 121.</p>
		<p>[901] Johnson considers here the war in America between the English and French, and shows a strong feeling for the natives who had been wronged by both nations. ‘Such is the contest that no honest man can heartily wish success to either party.⁠ ⁠… The American dispute between the French and us is only the quarrel of two robbers for the spoils of a passenger.’ The French had this in their favour, that they had treated the natives better than we. ‘The favour of the Indians which they enjoy with very few exceptions among all the nations of the northern continent we ought to consider with other thoughts; this favour we might have enjoyed, if we had been careful to deserve it.’ <i>Works</i>, vi. 114, 122.</p>
		<p>[902] These Memoirs end with the year 1745. Johnson had intended to continue them, for he writes:⁠—‘We shall here suspend our narrative.’ <i>Ib</i>. vi. 474.</p>
		<p>[903] See <i>ante</i>, p. 221.</p>
		<p>[904] The sentence continues:⁠—‘and produce heirs to the father’s habiliments.’ <i>Ib</i>. vi. 436. Another instance may be adduced of his <i>Brownism</i> in the following line:⁠—‘The war continued in an equilibration by alternate losses and advantages.’ <i>Ib</i> 473.</p>
		<p>[905] In a letter from the Secretary of the Tall Club in <i>The Guardian</i>, No. 108. ‘If the fair sex look upon us with an eye of favour, we shall make some attempts to lengthen out the human figure, and restore it to its ancient procerity.’</p>
		<p>[906] See <i>post</i>, March 23, 1783.</p>
		<p>[907] ‘As power is the constant and unavoidable consequence of learning, there is no reason to doubt that the time is approaching when the Americans shall in their turn have some influence on the affairs of mankind, for literature apparently gains ground among them. A library is established in Carolina and some great electrical discoveries were made at Philadelphia⁠ ⁠… The fear that the American colonies will break off their dependence on England I have always thought chimerical and vain⁠ ⁠… They must be dependent, and if they forsake us, or be forsaken by us, must fall into the hands of France.’ <i>Literary Magazine</i>, pp. 293, 299.</p>
		<p>[908] Johnson, I have no doubt, wrote the <i>Review of A True Account of Lisbon since the Earthquake</i>, in which it is stated that the destruction was grossly exaggerated. After quoting the writer at length, he concludes:⁠—‘Such then is the actual, real situation of <i>that place which once was</i> Lisbon, and has been since gazetically and pamphletically quite destroyed, consumed, annihilated! Now, upon comparing this simple narration of things and facts with the false and absurd accounts which have rather insulted and imposed upon us than informed us, who but must see the enormous disproportion?⁠ ⁠… Exaggeration and the absurdities ever faithfully attached to it are inseparable attitudes of the ignorant, the empty, and the affected. Hence those eloquent tropes so familiar in every conversation, <i>monstrously pretty, vastly little</i>;⁠ ⁠… hence your <i>eminent shoe-maker, farriers, and undertakers</i>.⁠ ⁠… It is to the same muddy source we owe the many falsehoods and absurdities we have been pestered with concerning Lisbon. Thence your extravagantly sublime figures: <i>Lisbon is no more; can be seen no more</i>, etc.,⁠ ⁠… with all the other prodigal effusions of bombast beyond that stretch of time or temper to enumerate. <i>Ib</i>. p. 22. See <i>post</i>, under March 30, 1778.</p>
		<p>[909] In the original <i>undigested</i>.</p>
		<p>[910] Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 113.</p>
		<p>[911] In the spring of 1784, after the king had taken advantage of Fox’s India Bill to dismiss the Coalition Ministry. See <i>post</i>, March 28, 1784.</p>
		<p>[912] In Ireland there was no act to limit the duration of parliament. One parliament sat through the whole reign of George II⁠—thirty-three years. Dr. Lucas, a Dublin physician, in attacking other grievances, attacked also this. In 1749 he would have been elected member for Dublin, had he not, on a charge of seditious writings, been committed by the House of Commons to prison. He was to be confined, he was told, ‘in the common hall of the prison among the felons.’ He fled to England, which was all that the government wanted, and he practised as a physician in London. In 1761 he was restored to the liberties of the City of Dublin and was also elected one of its members. Hardy’s <i>Lord Charlemont</i>, i. 249, 299; and <i>Gent. Mag</i>., xx. 58 and xxxi. 236.</p>
		<p>[913] Boswell himself falls into this ‘cant.’ See <i>post</i>, Sept. 23, 1777.</p>
		<p>[914] Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. II.</p>
		<p>[915] <i>Ib</i>. p. 13. He vigorously attacks the style in which these ‘Memoirs’ are written. ‘Sometimes,’ he writes, ‘the reader is suddenly ravished with a sonorous sentence, of which, when the noise is past, the meaning does not long remain.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 15.</p>
		<p>[916] The author of <i>Friendship in Death</i>.</p>
		<p>[917] In the _Lives of the Poets (Works, viii. 383) Johnson writes:⁠—‘Dr. Watts was one of the first authors that taught the Dissenters to court attention by the graces of language. Whatever they had among them before, whether of learning or acuteness, was commonly obscured and blunted by coarseness and inelegance of style. He showed them that zeal and purity might be expressed and enforced by polished diction.’</p>
		<p>[918] ‘Such he [Dr. Watts] was as every Christian Church would rejoice to have adopted.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 380. See also <i>post</i>, July 7, 1777, and May 19, 1778.</p>
		<p>[919] Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 79.</p>
		<p>[920] Mr. Hanway would have had the support of Johnson’s father, who, as his son writes, ‘considered tea as very expensive, and discouraged my mother from keeping company with the neighbours, and from paying visits or receiving them. She lived to say, many years after, that if the time were to pass again, she would not comply with such unsocial injunctions.’ <i>Account of Johnson’s Early Life</i>, p. 18. The Methodists, ten years earlier than Hanway, had declared war on tea. ‘After talking largely with both the men and women Leaders,’ writes Wesley, ‘we agreed it would prevent great expense, as well of health as of time and of money, if the poorer people of our society could be persuaded to leave off drinking of tea.’ Wesley’s <i>Journal</i>, i. 526. Pepys, writing in 1660, says: ‘I did send for a cup of tee, (a China drink) of which I never had drank before.’ Pepys’ <i>Diary</i>, i. 137. Horace Walpole (<i>Letters</i>, i. 224) writing in 1743 says:⁠—‘They have talked of a new duty on tea, to be paid by every housekeeper for all the persons in their families; but it will scarce be proposed. Tea is so universal, that it would make a greater clamour than a duty on wine.’ In October 1734 tea was sold in London at the following prices:⁠—Ordinary Bohca 9s. per lb. Fine Bohca 10s. to 12s. per lb. Pekoe 15s. per lb. Hyson 20s. to 25s. per lb. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. iv. 575.</p>
		<p>[921] Yet in his reply to Mr. Hanway he said (<i>Works</i>, vi. 33):⁠—‘I allowed tea to be a barren superfluity, neither medicinal nor nutritious, that neither supplied strength nor cheerfulness, neither relieved weariness, nor exhilarated sorrow.’ Cumberland writes (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 357):⁠—‘I remember when Sir Joshua Reynolds at my house reminded Dr. Johnson that he had drank eleven cups, he replied: “Sir, I did not count your glasses of wine, why should you number up my cups of tea?” And then laughing in perfect good humour he added:⁠—“Sir, I should have released the lady from any further trouble, if it had not been for your remark; but you have reminded me that I want one of the dozen, and I must request Mrs. Cumberland to round up my number.” ’</p>
		<p>[922] In this Review Johnson describes himself as ‘a hardened and shameless tea-drinker, who has for twenty years diluted his meals with only the infusion of this fascinating plant; whose kettle has scarcely time to cool; who with tea amuses the evening, with tea solaces the midnight, and with tea welcomes the morning.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 21. That ‘he never felt the least inconvenience from it’ may well be doubted. His nights were almost always bad. In 1774 he recorded:⁠—‘I could not drink this day either coffee or tea after dinner. I know not when I missed before.’ The next day he recorded:⁠—‘Last night my sleep was remarkably quiet. I know not whether by fatigue in walking, or by forbearance of tea.’ <i>Diary of a Journey into North Wales</i>, Aug. 4.</p>
		<p>[923] See <i>post</i>, May, 1768.</p>
		<p>[924]</p>
		<p>‘Losing, he wins, because his<br/>
		 name will be<br/>
		Ennobled by defeat who durst<br/>
		 contend with me.’<br/></p>
		<p>DRYDEN, Ovid, <i>Meta</i>., xiii. 19.</p>
		<p>[925] In Hanway’s <i>Essay</i> Johnson found much to praise. Hanway often went to the root when he dealt with the evils of life. Thus he writes:⁠—‘The introducing new habits of life is the most substantial charity.’ But he thus mingles sense and nonsense:⁠—‘Though tea and gin have spread their baneful influence over this island and his Majesty’s other dominions, yet you may be well assured that the Governors of the Foundling Hospital will exert their utmost skill and vigilance to prevent the children under their care from being poisoned, or enervated, by one or the other.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 26, 28.</p>
		<p>[926] ‘Et pourquoi tuer cet amiral? C’est, lui dit-on, parce qu’il n’a pas fait tuer assez de monde; il a livré un combat à un amiral français, et on a trouvé qu’il n’était pas assez près de lui. Mais, dit Candide, l’amiral français était aussi loin de l’amiral anglais que celui-ci l’était de l’autre. Cela est incontestable, lui répliquat-on; mais dans ce pays-ci il est bon de tuer de temps en temps un amiral pour encourager les autres.’ <i>Candide</i>, ch. xxiii.</p>
		<p>[927] See <i>post</i>, June 3, 1781, when Boswell went to this church.</p>
		<p>[928] Johnson reprinted this Review in a small volume by itself. See Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 47, note.</p>
		<p>[929]</p>
		<p>‘I have ventured,<br/>
		Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,<br/>
		This many summers in a sea of glory,<br/>
		But far beyond my depth.’<br/></p>
		<p>Henry VIII, Act iii. sc. 2.</p>
		<p>[930] <i>Musical Travels through England</i>, by Joel Collier [not Collyer], Organist, 1774. This book was written in ridicule of Dr. Burney’s <i>Travels</i>, who, says his daughter, ‘was much hurt on its first appearance.’ Dr. Burney’s <i>Memoirs</i>, i. 259.</p>
		<p>[931] See <i>ante</i>, p. 223.</p>
		<p>[932] Some time after Dr. Johnson’s death there appeared in the newspapers and magazines an illiberal and petulant attack upon him, in the form of an Epitaph, under the name of Mr. Soame Jenyns, very unworthy of that gentleman, who had quietly submitted to the critical lash while Johnson lived. It assumed, as characteristicks of him, all the vulgar circumstances of abuse which had circulated amongst the ignorant. It was an unbecoming indulgence of puny resentment, at a time when he himself was at a very advanced age, and had a near prospect of descending to the grave. I was truly sorry for it; for he was then become an avowed, and (as my Lord Bishop of London, who had a serious conversation with him on the subject, assures me) a sincere Christian. He could not expect that Johnson’s numerous friends would patiently bear to have the memory of their master stigmatized by no mean pen, but that, at least, one would be found to retort. Accordingly, this unjust and sarcastick Epitaph was met in the same publick field by an answer, in terms by no means soft, and such as wanton provocation only could justify:</p>
		<h5>‘EPITAPH,</h5>
		<p>‘<i>Prepared for a creature</i> not quite dead <i>yet</i>.</p>
		<p>‘Here lies a little ugly nauseous elf,<br/>
		Who judging only from its wretched self,<br/>
		Feebly attempted, petulant and vain,<br/>
		The “Origin of Evil” to explain.<br/>
		A mighty Genius at this elf displeas’d,<br/>
		With a strong critick grasp the urchin squeez’d.<br/>
		For thirty years its coward spleen it kept,<br/>
		Till in the duat the mighty Genius slept;<br/>
		Then stunk and fretted in expiring snuff,<br/>
		And blink’d at JOHNSON with its last poor puff.’<br/></p>
		<h5>BOSWELL.</h5>
		<p>The epitaph is very likely Boswell’s own. For Jenyns’s conversion see <i>post</i>, April 12 and 15, 1778.</p>
		<p>[933] Mr. John Payne, afterwards chief accountant of the Bank, one of the four surviving members of the Ivy Lane Club who dined together in 1783. See Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, pp. 220, 563; and <i>post</i>, December, 1783.</p>
		<p>[934] See <i>post</i>, under March 19, 1776.</p>
		<p>[935] ‘He said, “I am sorry I have not learnt to play at cards. It is very useful in life; it generates kindness and consolidates society.” ’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Nov. 21, 1773.</p>
		<p>[936] <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>, 3d edit. p. 48. [Aug. 19.] BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[937] Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, p. 435.</p>
		<p>[938] He was paid at the rate of a little over twopence a line. For this Introduction see <i>Ib</i>. 206.</p>
		<p>[939] See <i>post</i>, Oct. 26, 1769.</p>
		<p>[940] See <i>post</i>, April 5, 1775.</p>
		<p>[941] In 1740 he set apart the yearly sum of £100 to be distributed, by way of premium, to the authors of the best inventions, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, in Ireland. Chalmers’s <i>Biog. Dict</i>.</p>
		<p>[942] <i>Boulter’s Monument. A Panegyrical Poem, sacred to the memory of that great and excellent prelate and patriot, the Most Reverend Dr. Hugh Boulter; Late Lord-Archbishop of Ardmagh, and Primate of All Ireland</i>. Dublin, 1745. Such lines as the following might well have been blotted, but of them the poem is chiefly formed:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘My peaceful song in lays instructive paints<br/>
		The first of mitred peers and Britain’s saints.’ p. 2.<br/>
		‘Ha! mark! what gleam is that which paints the air?<br/>
		The blue serene expands! Is Boulter there?’ p. 88.<br/></p>
		<p>The poet addresses Boulter’s successor Hoadley, who he says,</p>
		<p>‘Shall equal him; while, like Elisha, you<br/>
		Enjoy his spirit, and his mantle too.’ p. 89.<br/></p>
		<p>A note to <i>mantle</i> says ‘Alluding to the metropolitan pallium.’</p>
		<p>Boulter is the bishop in Pope’s lines, (<i>Prologue to the Satires</i>, 1. 99):⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Does not one table Bavius still admit?</p>
		<p>‘Still to one bishop Philips seem a wit?’</p>
		<p>Pattison’s <i>Pope’s Satires</i>, p. 107. In the <i>Life of Addison</i>, Johnson mentioning Dr. Madden adds:⁠—‘a name which Ireland ought to honour.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 455.</p>
		<p>[943] See <i>ante</i>, p. 175. Hawkins writes (<i>Life</i>, p. 363):⁠—‘I congratulated him length, on his being now engaged in a work that suited his genius. His answer was:⁠—“I look upon this as I did upon the <i>Dictionary</i>; it is all work, and my inducement to it is not love or desire of fame, but the want of money, which is the only motive to writing that I know of.” ’</p>
		<p>[944] They have been reprinted by Mr. Malone, in the Preface to his edition of <i>Shakspeare</i>. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[945] At Christmas, 1757, he said that he should publish about March, 1758 (<i>post</i>, Dec. 24, 1757). When March came he said that he should publish before summer (<i>post</i>, March 1, 1758).</p>
		<p>[946] In what Johnson says of Pope’s slow progress in translating the <i>Iliad</i>, he had very likely his own case in view. ‘Indolence, interruption, business, and pleasure all take their turns of retardation; and every long work is lengthened by a thousand causes that can, and ten thousand that cannot be recounted. Perhaps no extensive and multifarious performance was ever effected within the term originally fixed in the undertaker’s mind. He that runs against time has an antagonist not subject to casualties.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 255. In Prior’s <i>Goldsmith</i> (i. 238) we have the following extracts from letters written by Grainger (<i>post</i>, March 21, 1776) to Dr. Percy:⁠—‘June 27, 1758. I have several times called on Johnson to pay him part of your subscription [for his edition of <i>Shakespeare</i>]. I say, part, because he never thinks of working if he has a couple of guineas in his pocket; but if you notwithstanding order me, the whole shall be given him at once.’ ‘July 20, 1758. As to his <i>Shakespeare, movet sed non promovet</i>. I shall feed him occasionally with guineas.’</p>
		<p>[947] Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 440) says that ‘Reynolds and some other of his friends, who were more concerned for his reputation than himself seemed to be, contrived to entangle him by a wager, or some other pecuniary engagement, to perform his task by a certain time.’ Just as Johnson was oppressed by the engagement that he had made to edit <i>Shakespeare</i>, so was Cowper by his engagement to edit <i>Milton</i>. ‘The consciousness that there is so much to do and nothing done is a burthen I am not able to bear. <i>Milton</i> especially is my grievance, and I might almost as well be haunted by his ghost, as goaded with such continual reproaches for neglecting him.’ Southey’s <i>Cowper</i>, vii. 163.</p>
		<p>[948] From <i>The Ghost</i>, Bk. iii. 1. 801. Boswell makes two slight errors in quoting: ‘You cash’ should be ‘their cash; and ‘you know’ should be ‘we know.’</p>
		<p>[949] See <i>post</i>, April 17, 1778.</p>
		<p>[950] Mrs. Thrale writing to him in 1777, says:⁠—‘You would rather be sick in London than well in the country.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>. i. 394. Yet Johnson, when he could afford to travel, spent far more time in the country than is commonly thought. Moreover a great part of each summer from 1766 to 1782 inclusive he spent at Streatham.</p>
		<p>[951] The motto to this number</p>
		<p>‘Steriles nec legit arenas,<br/>
		Ut caneret paucis, mersitque hoc pulvere verum.’<br/></p>
		<p>(Lucan).</p>
		<p>Johnson has thus translated:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Canst thou believe the vast eternal mind<br/>
		Was e’er to Syrts and Libyan sands confin’d?<br/>
		That he would choose this waste, this barren ground,<br/>
		To teach the thin inhabitants around,<br/>
		And leave his truth in wilds and deserts drown’d?’<br/></p>
		<p>[952] It was added to the January number of 1758, but it was dropped in the following numbers.</p>
		<p>[953] According to the note in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. the speech was delivered ‘at a certain respectable talking society.’ The chairman of the meeting is addressed as Mr. President. The speech is vigorously written and is, I have no doubt, by Johnson. ‘It is fit,’ the speaker says, ‘that those whom for the future we shall employ and pay may know they are the servants of a people that <i>expect duty for their money</i>. It is said an address expresses some distrust of the king, or may tend to disturb his quiet. An English king, Mr. President, has no great right to quiet when his people are in misery.’</p>
		<p>[954] See <i>post</i>, May 19, 1777.</p>
		<p>[955] See <i>post</i>, March 21, 1772.</p>
		<p>[956] ‘I have often observed with wonder, that we should know less of Ireland than of any other country in Europe.’ Temple’s <i>Works</i>, iii. 82.</p>
		<p>[957] The celebrated oratour, Mr. Flood has shewn himself to be of Dr. Johnson’s opinion; having by his will bequeathed his estate, after the death of his wife Lady Frances, to the University of Dublin; ‘desiring that immediately after the said estate shall come into their possession, they shall appoint two professors, one for the study of the native Erse or Irish language, and the other for the study of Irish antiquities and Irish history, and for the study of any other European language illustrative of, or auxiliary to, the study of Irish antiquities or Irish history; and that they shall give yearly two liberal premiums for two compositions, one in verse, and the other in prose, in the Irish language.’ BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[958] Dr. T. Campbell records in his <i>Diary of a Visit to England</i> (p. 62), that at the dinner at Messieurs Dilly’s (<i>post</i>, April 5, 1775) he ‘ventured to say that the first professors of Oxford, Paris, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, were Irish. “Sir,” says Johnson, “I believe there is something in what you say, and I am content with it, since they are not Scotch.” ’</p>
		<p>[959] ‘On Mr. Thrale’s attack of apoplexy in 1779, Johnson wrote to Mrs. Thrale:⁠—‘I remember Dr. Marsigli, an Italian physician, whose seizure was more violent than Mr. Thrale’s, for he fell down helpless, but his case was not considered as of much danger, and he went safe home, and is now a professor at Padua.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 48.</p>
		<p>[960] ‘Now, or late, Vice-Chancellor.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL. He was Vice-Chancellor when Johnson’s degree was conferred (<i>ante</i>, p. 282), but his term of office had now come to an end.</p>
		<p>[961] ‘Mr. Warton was elected Professor of Poetry at Oxford in the preceding year.’ WARTON.-BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[962] ‘Miss Jones lived at Oxford, and was often of our parties. She was a very ingenious poetess, and published a volume of poems; and, on the whole, was a most sensible, agreeable, and amiable woman. She was a sister to the Reverend River Jones, Chanter of Christ Church Cathedral at Oxford, and Johnson used to call her the <i>Chantress</i>. I have heard him often address her in this passage from <i>Il Penseroso</i>:</p>
		<p>“Thee, Chantress, oft the woods among I woo,” etc.</p>
		<p>She died unmarried.’ WHARTON</p>
		<p>[963] Tom. iii. p. 482. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[964] Of <i>Shakspeare</i>. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[965] This letter is misdated. It was written in Jan. 1759, and not in 1758. Johnson says that he is forty-nine. In Jan. 1758 he was forty-eight. He mentions the performance of <i>Cleane</i>, which was at the end of 1758; and he says that ‘Murphy is to have his <i>Orphan of China</i> acted next month.’ It was acted in the spring of 1759.</p>
		<p>[966] <i>Juvenal</i>, Sat. iii. 1.</p>
		<p>‘Though grief and fondness in my breast rebel,<br/>
		When injured Thales bids the town farewell,<br/>
		Yet still my calmer thoughts his choice commend,<br/>
		I praise the hermit, but regret the friend;<br/>
		Resolved at length from vice and London far<br/>
		To breathe in distant fields a purer air,<br/>
		And fixed on Cambria’s solitary shore<br/>
		Give to St. David one true Briton more.’<br/></p>
		<p>Johnson’s <i>London</i>, l. 1.</p>
		<p>[967] Mr. Garrick. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[968] Mr. Dodsley, the Authour of <i>Cleone</i>. BOSWELL. Garrick, according to Davies, had rejected Dodsley’s <i>Cleone</i>, ‘and had termed it a cruel, bloody, and unnatural play.’ Davies’s <i>Garrick</i>, i. 223. Johnson himself said of it:⁠—‘I am afraid there is more blood than brains.’ <i>Post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton’s <i>Collection</i>. The night it was brought out at Covent Garden, Garrick appeared for the first time as Marplot in the <i>Busy Body</i> at Drury Lane. The next morning he wrote to congratulate Dodsley on his success, and asked him at the same time to let him know how he could support his interest without absolutely giving up his own. To this Dodsley returned a cold reply. Garrick wrote back as follows:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Master Robert Dodsley,</p>
		<p>When I first read your peevish answer to my well-meant proposal to you, I was much disturbed at it⁠—but when I considered, that some minds cannot bear the smallest portion of success, I most sincerely pitied you; and when I found in the same letter, that you were graciously pleased to dismiss me from your acquaintance, I could not but confess so apparent an obligation, and am with due acknowledgements,</p>
		<p>Master Robert Dodsley,</p>
		<p>Your most obliged</p>
		<p>David Garrick.’</p>
		<p>Garrick <i>Corres</i>., i. 80 (where the letters that passed are wrongly dated 1757). Mrs. Bellamy in her <i>Life</i> (iii. 109) says that on the evening of the performance she was provoked by something that Dodsley said, ‘which,’ she continues, ‘made me answer that good man with a petulance which afterwards gave me uneasiness. I told him that I had a reputation to lose as an actress; but, as for his piece, Mr. Garrick had anticipated the damnation of it publicly, the preceding evening, at the Bedford Coffee-house, where he had declared that it could not pass muster, as it was the very worst piece ever exhibited.’ Shenstone (<i>Works</i>, iii. 288) writing five weeks after the play was brought out, says:⁠—‘Dodsley is now going to print his fourth edition. He sold 2000 of his first edition the very first day he published it.’ The price was eighteen-pence.</p>
		<p>[969] Mrs. Bellamy (<i>Life</i>, iii. 108) says that Johnson was present at the last rehearsal. ‘When I came to repeat, “Thou shalt not murder,” Dr. Johnson caught me by the arm, and that somewhat too briskly, saying, at the same time, “It is a commandment, and must be spoken, Thou shalt <i>not</i> murder.” As I had not then the honour of knowing personally that great genius, I was not a little displeased at his inforcing his instructions with so much vehemence.’ The next night she heard, she says, amidst the general applause, ‘the same voice which had instructed me in the commandment, exclaim aloud from the pit, “I will write a copy of verses upon her myself.” I knew that my success was insured.’ See <i>post</i>, May 11, 1783.</p>
		<p>[970] Dodsley had published his <i>London</i> and his <i>Vanity of Human Wishes</i> (<i>ante</i>, pp. 124, 193), and had had a large share in the <i>Dictionary</i>, (<i>ante</i>, p. 183).</p>
		<p>[971] It is to this that Churchill refers in the following lines:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Let them [the Muses] with Glover o’er Medea doze;<br/>
		Let them with Dodsley wail Cleone’s woes,<br/>
		Whilst he, fine feeling creature, all in tears,<br/>
		Melts as they melt, and weeps with weeping Peers.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>The Journey</i>. <i>Poems</i>, ii. 328.</p>
		<p>[972] See <i>post</i> p. 350, note.</p>
		<p>[973] Mr. Samuel Richardson, authour of <i>Clarissa</i>. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[974] In 1753 when in Devonshire he charged five guineas a head (Taylor’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 89); shortly afterwards, when he removed to London, twelve guineas (<i>ib</i>. p. 101); in 1764, thirty guineas; for a whole length 150 guineas (<i>ib</i>. p. 224). Northcote writes that ‘he sometimes has lamented the being interrupted in his work by idle visitors, saying, “those persons do not consider that my time is worth to me five guineas an hour.” ’ Northcote’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 83.</p>
		<p>[975] ‘Miss Reynolds at first amused herself by painting miniature portraits, and in that part of the art was particularly successful. In her attempts at oil-painting, however, she did not succeed, which made Reynolds say jestingly, that her pictures in that way made other people laugh and him cry; and as he did not approve of her painting in oil, she generally did it by stealth.’ <i>Ib</i>. ii. 160.</p>
		<p>[976] Murphy was far from happy. The play was not produced till April; by the date of Johnson’s letter, he had not by any means reached the end of what he calls ‘the first, and indeed, the last, disagreeable controversy that he ever had with Mr. Garrick.’ Murphy’s <i>Garrick</i>, p. 213.</p>
		<p>[977] This letter was an answer to one in which was enclosed a draft for the payment of some subscriptions to his <i>Shakspeare</i>. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[978] In the Preface he says:⁠—(<i>Works</i>, v. 52) ‘I have not passed over with affected superiority what is equally difficult to the reader and to myself, but where I could not instruct him, have owned my ignorance.’</p>
		<p>[979] Northcote gives the following account of this same garret in describing how Reynolds introduced Roubiliac to Johnson. ‘Johnson received him with much civility, and took them up into a garret, which he considered as his library; where, besides his books, all covered with dust, there was an old crazy deal table, and a still worse and older elbow chair, having only three legs. In this chair Johnson seated himself, after having, with considerable dexterity and evident practice, first drawn it up against the wall, which served to support it on that side on which the leg was deficient.’ Northcote’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 75. Miss Reynolds improves on the account. She says that ‘before Johnson had the pension he literally dressed like a beggar; and, from what I have been told, he as literally lived as such; at least as to common conveniences in his apartments, wanting even a chair to sit on, particularly in his study, where a gentleman who frequently visited him, whilst writing his <i>Idlers</i>, constantly found him at his desk, sitting on one with three legs; and on rising from it, he remarked that Dr. Johnson never forgot its defect, but would either hold it in his hand, or place it with great composure against some support, taking no notice of its imperfection to his visitor. It was remarkable in Johnson, that no external circumstances ever prompted him to make any apology, or to seem even sensible of their existence.’ Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, p. 832. There can be little question that she is describing the same room⁠—a room in a house in which Miss Williams was lodged, and most likely Mr. Levet, and in which Mr. Burney dined; and in which certainly there must have been chairs. Yet Mr. Carlyle, misled by her account, says:⁠—‘In his apartments, at one time, there were unfortunately no chairs.’ Carlyle’s <i>Miscellanies</i>, ed. 1872, iv. 127.</p>
		<p>[980] In his <i>Life of Pope</i> (<i>Works</i>, viii. 272) Johnson calls Theobald ‘a man of heavy diligence, with very slender powers.’ In the Preface to Shakspeare he admits that ‘what little he did was commonly right.’ <i>Ib</i>. v. 137. The Editors of the <i>Cambridge Shakespeare</i> on the other hand say:⁠—‘Theobald, as an Editor, is incomparably superior to his predecessors, and to his immediate successor Warburton, although the latter had the advantage of working on his materials. Many most brilliant emendations are due to him.’ On Johnson’s statement that ‘Warburton would make two-and-fifty Theobalds, cut into slices,’ they write:⁠—‘From this judgment, whether they be compared as critics or editors, we emphatically dissent.’ <i>Cambridge Shakespeare</i>, i., xxxi., xxxiv., note. Among Theobald’s ‘brilliant emendations’ are ‘a’babbled of green fields’ (<i>Henry V</i>, ii. 3), and ‘lackeying the varying tide.’ (<i>Antony and Cleopatra</i>, i.4).</p>
		<p>[981] ‘<i>A familiar epistle</i> [by Lord Bolingbroke] <i>to the most impudent man living</i>, 1749.’ <i>Brit. Mus. Catal</i>.</p>
		<p>[982] ‘Mallet, by address or accident, perhaps by his dependence on the prince [of Wales], found his way to Bolingbroke, a man whose pride and petulance made his kindness difficult to gain or keep, and whom Mallet was content to court by an act, which, I hope, was unwillingly performed. When it was found that Pope had clandestinely printed an unauthorised number of the pamphlet called <i>The Patriot King</i>, Bolingbroke, in a fit of useless fury, resolved to blast his memory, and employed Mallet (1749) as the executioner of his vengeance. Mallet had not virtue, or had not spirit, to refuse the office; and was rewarded not long after with the legacy of Lord Bolingbroke’s works.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 467. See <i>ante</i>, p. 268, and Walpole’s <i>Letters</i>, ii. 159.</p>
		<p>[983] <i>A View of Lord Bolingbroke’s Philosophy in Four Letters to a Friend</i>, 1754⁠–⁠5.</p>
		<p>[984] A paper under this name had been started seven years earlier. See <i>Carter and Talbot Corres</i>., ii. 33.</p>
		<p>[985] In the two years in which Johnson wrote for this paper it saw many changes. The first <i>Idler</i> appeared in No. 2 of the <i>Universal Chronicle or Weekly Gazette</i>, which was published not by Newbery, but by J. Payne. On April 29, this paper took the title of <i>Payne’s Universal Chronicle</i>, etc. On Jan. 6, 1759, it resumed the old title and was published by R. Stevens. On Jan. 5, 1760, the title was changed to <i>The Universal Chronicle and Westminster Journal</i>, and it was published by W. Faden and R. Stevens. On March 15, 1760, it was published by R. Stevens alone. The paper consisted of eight pages. <i>The Idler</i>, which varied in length, came first, and was printed in larger characters, much like a leading article. The changes in title and ownership seem to show that in spite of Johnson’s contributions it was not a successful publication.</p>
		<p>[986] ‘Those papers may be considered as a kind of syllabus of all Reynolds’s future discourses, and certainly occasioned him some thinking in their composition. I have heard him say, that Johnson required them from him on a sudden emergency, and on that account, he sat up the whole night to complete them in time; and by it he was so much disordered, that it produced a vertigo in his head.’ Northcote’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 89, Reynolds must have spoken of only one paper; as the three, appearing as they did on Sept. 29, Oct. 20, and Nov. 10, could not have been required at one time.</p>
		<p>[987] ‘To be idle and to be poor have always been reproaches, and therefore every man endeavours with his utmost care to hide his poverty from others, and his idleness from himself.’ <i>The Idler</i>, No. 17.</p>
		<p>[988] Prayers and Meditations, p. 30 [36], BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[989] In July, 1759.</p>
		<p>[990] This number was published a few days after his mother’s death. It is in the form of a letter, which is thus introduced:-‘The following letter relates to an affliction perhaps not necessary to be imparted to the publick; but I could not persuade myself to suppress it, because I think I know the sentiments to be sincere, and I feel no disposition to provide for this day any other entertainment.’</p>
		<p>[991] In the table of contents the title of No. 58 is, ‘Expectations of pleasure frustrated.’ In the original edition of <i>The Idler</i> no titles are given. In this paper he shews that ‘nothing is more hopeless than a scheme of merriment.’</p>
		<p>[992] In this paper he begins by considering, ‘why the only thinking being of this globe is doomed to think merely to be wretched, and to pass his time from youth to age in fearing or in suffering calamities.’ He ends by asserting that ‘of what virtue there is, misery produces far the greater part.’</p>
		<p>[993] ‘There are few things,’ he writes, ‘not purely evil, of which we can say, without some emotion of uneasiness, <i>this is the last</i>.⁠ ⁠… The secret horrour of the last is inseparable from a thinking being, whose life is limited, and to whom death is dreadful.’</p>
		<p>[994] ‘I asked him one day, why the <i>Idlers</i> were published without mottoes. He replied, that it was forborne the better to conceal himself, and escape discovery. “But let us think of some now,” said he, “for the next edition. We can fit the two volumnes in two hours, can’t we?” Accordingly he recollected, and I wrote down these following (nine mottoes) till come friend coming in, in about five minutes, put an end to our further progress on the subject.’ <i>Piossi Letters</i>, ii. 388.</p>
		<p>[995] See <i>post</i>, July 14 and 26, 1763, April 14, 1775, and Aug. 2, 1784, note for instances in which Johnson ridicules the notion that weather and seasons have any necessary effect on man; also April 17, 1778. In the <i>Life of Milton</i> (<i>Works</i>. vii. 102), he writes:⁠—‘this dependence of the soul upon the seasons, those temporary and periodical ebbs and flows of intellect, may, I suppose, justly be derided as the fumes of vain imagination. <i>Sapiens dominabitur astro</i>. The author that thinks himself weather-bound will find, with a little help from hellebore, that he is only idle or exhausted. But while this notion has possession of the head, it produces the inability with it supposes. Our powers owe much of their energy to our hopes; <i>possunt quin posse vidertur</i>.’ Boswell records, in his <i>Hebrides</i> (Aug. 16, 1773), that when ‘somebody talked of happy moments for composition,’ Johnson said:⁠—‘Nay, a man may write at any time, if he will set himself <i>doggedly</i> to it.’ Reynolds, who Alas! avowed how much he had learnt from Johnson (<i>ante</i>, p. 245), says much the same in his <i>Seventh Discourse</i>: ‘But when, in plain prose, we gravely talk of courting the Muse in shady bowers; waiting the call and inspiration of Genius⁠ ⁠… of attending to times and seasons when the imagination shoots with the greatest vigour, whether at the summer solstice or the vernal equinox⁠ ⁠… when we talk such language or entertain such sentiments as these, we generally rest contented with mere words, or at best entertain notions not only groundless but pernicious.’ Reynolds’s <i>Works</i>, i. 150. On the other hand, in 1773 Johnson recorded:⁠—‘Between Easter and Whitsuntide, having always considered that time as propitious to study, I attempted to learn the Low-Dutch language.’ <i>Post</i>, under May 9, 1773. In <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 80, he says:⁠—‘To the men of study and imagination the winter is generally the chief time of labour. Gloom and silence produce composure of mind and concentration of ideas.’ In a letter to Mrs. Thrale, written in 1775, he says:⁠—‘Most men have their bright and their Cloudy days, at least they have days when they put their powers into act, and days when they suffer them to repose.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 265. In 1781 he wrote:⁠—‘I thought myself above assistance or obstruction from the seasons; but find the autumnal blast sharp and nipping, and the fading world an uncomfortable prospect.’ <i>Ib</i>. ii. 220. Again, in the last year of his life he wrote:⁠—‘The: weather, you know, has not been balmy. I am now reduced to think, and am at least content to talk, of the weather. Pride must have a fall.’ <i>Post</i>, Aug. 2, 1784.</p>
		<p>[996] Addison’s <i>Cato</i>, act i. sc. 4.</p>
		<p>[997] Johnson, reviewing the Duchess of Marlborough’s attack on Queen Mary, says (<i>Works</i>, vi. 8):⁠—‘This is a character so different from all those that have been hitherto given of this celebrated princess, that the reader stands in suspense, till he considers that⁠ ⁠… it has hitherto had this great advantage, that it has only been compared with those of kings.’</p>
		<p>[998] Johnson had explained how it comes to pass that Englishmen talk so commonly of the weather. He continues:⁠—‘Such is the reason of our practice; and who shall treat it with contempt? Surely not the attendant on a court, whose business is to watch the looks of a being weak and foolish as himself, and whose vanity is to recount the names of men, who might drop into nothing, and leave no vacuity.⁠ ⁠… The weather is a nobler and more interesting subject; it is the present state of the skies and of the earth, on which plenty and famine are suspended, on which millions depend for the necessaries of life.’ ‘Garrick complained that when he went to read before the court, not a look or a murmur testified approbation; there was a profound stillness⁠—every one only watched to see what the king thought.’ Hazlitt’s <i>Conversations of Northcote</i>, p. 262.</p>
		<p>[999] <i>The Idler</i>, No. 90. See <i>post</i>, April 3, 1773, where he declaims against action in public speaking.</p>
		<p>[1000] He now and then repeats himself. Thus, in <i>The Idler</i>, No. 37, he moralises on the story, how Socrates, passing through the fair at Athens, cried out:⁠—‘How many things are here which I do not need!’ though he had already moralised on it in <i>the Adventurer</i>, Nos. 67, 119.</p>
		<p>[1001] No. 34.</p>
		<p>[1002] <i>Poems on Several Occasions</i>, by Thomas Blacklock, p. 179. See <i>post</i>, Aug. 5, 1763, and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 17, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1003] ‘Among the papers of Newbery, in the possession of Mr. Murray, is the account rendered on the collection of <i>The Idler</i> into two small volumes, when the arrangement seems to have been that Johnson should receive two-thirds of the profits.</p>
		<p><i>The Idler</i>.</p>
		<p>‘DR. £. s. d.<br/>
		Paid for Advertising.. 20 0 6<br/>
		Printing two vols., 1,500 41 13 0<br/>
		Paper.⁠ ⁠… ⁠ ⁠… 52 3 0<br/>
		 * * * * *<br/>
		 £113 16 6<br/>
		Profit on the edition . 126 3 6<br/>
		 * * * * *<br/>
		 £240 0 0<br/>
		 * * * * *<br/>
		 ‘CR. £. s. d.<br/>
		1,500 Sets at 16£ per 100 240 0 0<br/>
		 * * * * *<br/>
		Dr. Johnson two-thirds 84 2 4<br/>
		Mr. Newbery one-third. 42 1 2<br/>
		 * * * * *<br/>
		 £126 3 6<br/>
		 * * * * *<br/></p>
		<p>Forster’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 204.</p>
		<p>If this account is correctly printed, the sale must have been slow. The first edition (2 vols. 5s.) was published in Oct. 1761, (<i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxxi. 479). Johnson is called Dr. in the account; but he was not made an LL.D. till July 1765. Prior, in his <i>Life of Goldsmith</i> (i. 459), publishes an account between Goldsmith and Newbery in which the first entry is:⁠—</p>
		<p>’1761. Oct. 14, 1 set of<br/>
		 <i>The Idler</i>..⁠ ⁠… £0 50 0.’<br/></p>
		<p>Johnson, as Newbery’s papers show, a year later bought a copy of<br/>
		Goldsmith’s <i>Life of Nash</i>; <i>ib</i>. p. 405.<br/></p>
		<p>[1004] See <i>ante</i>, p. 306.</p>
		<p>[1005] This paper may be found in Stockdale’s supplemental volume of Johnson’s <i>Miscellaneous Pieces</i>. BOSWELL. Stockdale’s supplemental volumes⁠—for there are two⁠—are vols. xii. and xiii. of what is known as ‘Hawkins’s edition.’ In this paper (<i>Works</i>, iv. 450) he represents in a fable two vultures speculating on that mischievous being, man, ‘who is the only beast who kills that which he does not devour,’ who at times is seen to move in herds, while ‘there is in every herd one that gives directions to the rest, and seems to be more eminently delighted with a wide carnage.’</p>
		<p>[1006] ‘Receipts for <i>Shakespeare</i>.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1007] ‘Then of Lincoln College. Now Sir Robert Chambers, one of the Judges in India.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1008] Old Mr. Langton’s niece. See <i>post,</i> July 14, 1763.</p>
		<p>[1009] ‘Mr. Langton.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1010] Boswell records:⁠—‘Lady Di Beauclerk told me that Langton had never been to see her since she came to Richmond, his head was so full of the militia and Greek. “Why,” said I, “Madam, he is of such a length he is awkward and not easily moved.” “But,” said she, “if he had lain himself at his length, his feet had been in London, and his head might have been here <i>eodem die</i>.” ’ <i>Boswelliana</i>, p. 297.</p>
		<p>[1011] ‘Part of the impression of the <i>Shakespeare</i>, which Dr. Johnson conducted alone, and published by subscription. This edition came out in 1765.’ WARTON.⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1012] Stockdale records (<i>Memoirs</i>, ii. 191), that after he had entered on his charge as domestic tutor to Lord Craven’s son, he called on Johnson, who asked him how he liked his place. On his hesitating to answer, he said: ‘You must expect insolence.’ He added that in his youth he had entertained great expectations from a powerful family. “At length,” he said, “I found that their promises, and consequently my expectations, vanished into air.⁠ ⁠… But, Sir, they would have treated me much worse, if they had known that motives from which I paid my court to them were purely selfish, and what opinion I had formed of them.” He added, that since he knew mankind, he had not, on any occasion, been the sport of such delusion and that he had never been disappointed by anyone but himself.’</p>
		<p>[1013] This, and some of the other letters to Langton, were not received by Boswell till the first volume of the second edition had been carried through the press. He gave them as a supplement to the second volume. The date of this letter was there wrongly given as June 27, 1758. In the third edition it was corrected. Nevertheless the letter was misplaced as if the wrong date were the right one. Langton, as I have shewn (<i>ante</i>, p. 247), subscribed the articles at Oxford on July 7, 1757. He must have come into residence, as Johnson did (<i>ante</i>, p. 58), some little while before this subscription.</p>
		<p>[1014] Major-General Alexander Dury, of the first regiment of foot-guards, who fell in the gallant discharge of his duty, near St. Cas, in the well-known unfortunate expedition against France, in 1758. His lady and Mr. Langton’s mother was sisters. He left an only son, Lieutenant-Colonel Dury, who has a company in the same regiment. BOSWELL. The expedition had been sent against St. Malo early in September. Failing in the attempt, the land forces retreated to St. Cas, where, while embarking, they were attacked by the French. About 400 of our soldiers were made prisoners, and 600 killed and wounded. <i>Ann. Reg</i>.i.68.</p>
		<p>[1015] See <i>post</i>, 1770, in Dr. Maxwell’s <i>Collectanea</i>.</p>
		<p>[1016] Hawkins’s <i>Life of Johnson</i>, p. 365. BOSWELL. ‘In the beginning of the year 1759 an event happened for which it might be imagined he was well prepared, the death of his mother, who had attained the age of ninety; but he, whose mind had acquired no firmness by the contemplation of mortality, was as little able to sustain the shock, as he would have been had this loss befallen him in his nonage.’</p>
		<p>[1017] We may apply to Johnson in his behaviour to his mother what he said of Pope in his behaviour to his parents:⁠—‘Whatever was his pride, to them he was obedient; and whatever was his irritability, to them he was gentle. Life has among its soothing and quiet comforts few things better to give than such a son.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 281. In <i>The Idler</i> of January 27, 1759 (No. 41), Johnson shews his grief for his loss. ‘The last year, the last day must come. It has come, and is past. The life which made my own life pleasant is at an end, and the gates of death are shut upon my prospects.⁠ ⁠… Such is the condition of our present existence that life must one time lose its associations, and every inhabitant of the earth must walk downward to the grave alone and unregarded, without any partner of his joy or grief, without any interested witness of his misfortunes or success. Misfortune, indeed, he may yet feel; for where is the bottom of the misery of man? But what is success to him that has none to enjoy it? Happiness is not found in self-contemplation; it is perceived only when it is reflected from another.’ In <i>Rasselas</i> (ch. xlv.) he makes a sage say with a sigh:⁠—‘Praise is to have an old man an empty sound. I have neither mother to be delighted with the reputation of her son, nor wife to partake the honours of her husband.’ He here says once more what he had already said in his <i>Letter to Lord Chesterfield</i> (<i>ante</i>, p. 261), and in the <i>Preface to the Dictionary</i> (<i>ante</i>, p. 297).</p>
		<p>[1018] Writing to his Birmingham friend, Mr. Hector, on Oct. 7, 1756, he said:⁠—‘I have been thinking every month of coming down into the country, but every month has brought its hinderances. From that kind of melancholy indisposition which I had when we lived together at Birmingham I have never been free, but have always had it operating against my health and my life with more or less violence. I hope however to see all my friends, all that are remaining, in no very long time.’ <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S. iii. 301. No doubt his constant poverty and the need that he was under of making ‘provision for the day that was passing over him’ had had much to do in keeping him from a journey to Lichfield. A passage in one of his letters shews that fourteen years later the stage-coach took twenty-six hours in going from London to Lichfield. (<i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 55.) The return journey was very uncertain; for ‘our carriages,’ he wrote, ‘are only such as pass through the place sometimes full and sometimes vacant.’ A traveller had to watch for a place (<i>ib</i>. p. 51). As measured by time London was, in 1772, one hour farther from Lichfield than it now is from Marseilles. It is strange, when we consider the long separation between Johnson and his mother, that in <i>Rasselas</i>, written just after her death, he makes Imlac say:-‘There is such communication [in Europe] between distant places, that one friend can hardly be said to be absent from another.’ <i>Rasselas</i>, chap, xi. His step-daughter, Miss Porter, though for many years she was well off, had never been to London. <i>Post</i>, March 23, 1776. Nay, according to Horace Walpole (<i>Memoirs of the Reign of George III</i>, iv. 327), ‘George III. had never seen the sea, nor ever been thirty miles from London at the age of thirty-four.’</p>
		<p>[1019] For the letters written at this time by Johnson to his mother and Miss Porter, see Appendix B.</p>
		<p>[1020] <i>Rasselas</i> was published in two volumes, duodecimo, and was sold for five shillings. It was reviewed in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for April, and was no doubt published in that month. In a letter to Miss Porter dated March 23, 1759 (See Appendix), Johnson says:⁠—‘I am going to publish a little story-book, which I will send you when it is out.’ I may here remark that the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. was published at the end of the month, or even later. Thus the number for April, 1759, contains news as late as April 30. The name <i>Rasselas</i> Johnson got from Lobo’s <i>Voyage to Abyssinia</i>. On p. 102 of that book he mentions ‘Rassela Christos, Lieutenant-General to _Abysinia; Sultan Segued.’ On p. 262 he explains the meaning of the first part of the word:⁠—‘There is now a Generalissimo established under the title of <i>Ras</i>, or <i>Chief</i>.’ The title still exists. Colonel Gordon mentions Ras Arya and Ras Aloula. The Rev. W. West, in his <i>Introduction to Rasselas</i>, p. xxxi (Sampson Low and Co.), says:⁠—‘The word <i>Ras</i>, which is common to the Amharic, Arabic, and Hebrew tongues, signifies a <i>head</i>, and hence a prince, chief, or captain.⁠ ⁠… Sela Christos means either “Picture of Christ,” or “For the sake of Christ.” ’</p>
		<p>[1021] Hawkins’s Johnson, p. 367.</p>
		<p>[1022] See <i>post</i>, June 2, 1781. Finding it then accidentally in a chaise with Mr. Boswell, he read it eagerly. This was doubtless long after his declaration to Sir Joshua Reynolds. MALONE.</p>
		<p>[1023] Baretti told Malone that ‘Johnson insisted on part of the money being paid immediately, and accordingly received £70. Any other person with the degree of reputation he then possessed would have got £400 for that work, but he never understood the art of making the most of his productions.’ Prior’s <i>Malone</i>, p. 160. Some of the other circumstances there related by Baretti are not correct.</p>
		<p>[1024] Hawkesworth received £6000 for his revision of Cook’s <i>Voyages</i>; <i>post</i>, May 7, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1025] See <i>post</i>, March 4, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1026] <i>Ecclesiastes</i>, i. 14.</p>
		<p>[1027] See <i>post</i>, May 16, 1778. It should seem that <i>Candide</i> was published in the latter half of February 1759. Grimm in his letter of March 1, speaks of its having just appeared. ‘M. de Voltaire vient de nous égayer par un petit roman.’ He does not mention it in his previous letter of Feb. 15. <i>Grimm, Carres. Lit</i>. (edit. 1829), ii. 296. Johnson’s letter to Miss Porter, quoted in the Appendix, shows that Rasselas was written before March 23; how much earlier cannot be known. <i>Candide</i> is in the May list of books in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. (pp. 233⁠–⁠5), price 2_s_. 6_d_., and with it two translations, each price 1_s_. 6_d_.</p>
		<p>[1028] See <i>post</i>, June 13, 1763.</p>
		<p>[1029] In the original⁠—‘which, perhaps, prevails.’ <i>Rasselas</i>, ch. xxxi.</p>
		<p>[1030] This is the second time that Boswell puts ‘morbid melancholy’ in quotation marks (ante, p. 63). Perhaps he refers to a passage in Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i> (p. 287), where the author speaks of Johnson’s melancholy as ‘this morbid affection, as he was used to call it.’</p>
		<p>[1031] ‘Perfect through sufferings.’ <i>Hebrews</i>, ii. 10.</p>
		<p>[1032] Perhaps the reference is to the conclusion of <i>Le Monde comme il va</i>:⁠—‘Il résolut⁠ ⁠… de laisser aller <i>le monde comme il va</i>; car, dit il, <i>si tout riest pas bien, tout est passable</i>.’</p>
		<p>[1033] Gray, <i>On a Distant Prospect of Eton College</i>.</p>
		<p>[1034] Johnson writing to Mrs. Thrale said:⁠—’<i>Vivite lacti</i> is one of the great rules of health.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 55. ‘It was the motto of a bishop very eminent for his piety and good works in King Charles the Second’s reign, <i>Inservi Deo et laetare</i>⁠—“Serve God and be cheerful.” ’ Addison’s <i>Freeholder</i>, No. 45.</p>
		<p>[1035] Literary and Moral Character of Dr. Johnson. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1036] This paper was in such high estimation before it was collected into volumes, that it was seized on with avidity by various publishers of news-papers and magazines, to enrich their publications. Johnson, to put a stop to this unfair proceeding, wrote for the <i>Universal Chronicle</i> the following advertisement; in which there is, perhaps, more pomp of words than the occasion demanded:</p>
		<p>‘London, January 5, 1759. ADVERTISEMENT. The proprietors of the paper intitled <i>The Idler</i>, having found that those essays are inserted in the news-papers and magazines with so little regard to justice or decency, that the <i>Universal Chronicle</i>, in which they first appear, is not always mentioned, think it necessary to declare to the publishers of those collections, that however patiently they have hitherto endured these injuries, made yet more injurious by contempt, they have now determined to endure them no longer. They have already seen essays, for which a very large price is paid, transferred, with the most shameless rapacity, into the weekly or monthly compilations, and their right, at least for the present, alienated from them, before they could themselves be said to enjoy it. But they would not willingly be thought to want tenderness, even for men by whom no tenderness hath been shewn. The past is without remedy, and shall be without resentment. But those who have been thus busy with their sickles in the fields of their neighbours, are henceforward to take notice, that the time of impunity is at an end. Whoever shall, without our leave, lay the hand of rapine upon our papers, is to expect that we shall vindicate our due, by the means which justice prescribes, and which are warranted by the immemorial prescriptions of honourable trade. We shall lay hold, in our turn, on their copies, degrade them from the pomp of wide margin and diffuse typography, contract them into a narrow space, and sell them at an humble price; yet not with a view of growing rich by confiscations, for we think not much better of money got by punishment than by crimes. We shall, therefore, when our losses are repaid, give what profit shall remain to the <i>Magdalens</i>; for we know not who can be more properly taxed for the support of penitent prostitutes, than prostitutes in whom there yet appears neither penitence nor shame.’ BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1037] I think that this letter belongs to a later date, probably to 1765 or 1766. As we learn, <i>post</i>, April 10, 1776, Simpson was a barrister ‘who fell into a dissipated course of life.’ On July 2, 1765, Johnson records that he repaid him ten guineas which he had borrowed in the lifetime of Mrs. Johnson (his wife). He also lent him ten guineas more. If it was in 1759 that Simpson was troubled by small debts, it is most unlikely that Johnson let six years more pass without repaying him a loan which even then was at least of seven years’ standing. Moreover, in this letter Johnson writes:⁠—‘I have been invited, or have invited myself, to several parts of the kingdom.’ The only visits, it seems, that he paid between 1754⁠–⁠1762 were to Oxford in 1759 and to Lichfield in the winter of 1761⁠–⁠2. After 1762, when his pension gave him means, he travelled frequently. Besides all this, he says of his step-daughter:⁠—‘I will not incommode my dear Lucy by coming to Lichfield, while her present lodging is of any use to her.’ Miss Porter seems to have lived in his house till she had built one for herself. Though his letter to her of Jan. 10, 1764 (Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, p. 163), shews that it was then building, yet she had not left his house on Jan. 14, 1766 (<i>ib</i>. p. 173).</p>
		<p>‘To JOSEPH SIMPSON, ESQ.</p>
		<h5>‘DEAR SIR,</h5>
		<p>‘Your father’s inexorability not only grieves but amazes me[1038]: he is your father; he was always accounted a wise man; nor do I remember any thing to the disadvantage of his good-nature; but in his refusal to assist you there is neither good-nature, fatherhood, nor wisdom. It is the practice of good-nature to overlook faults which have already, by the consequences, punished the delinquent. It is natural for a father to think more favourably than others of his children; and it is always wise to give assistance while a little help will prevent the necessity of greater.</p>
		<p>[1038] In the <i>Rambler</i>, No. 148, entitled ‘The cruelty of parental tyranny,’ Johnson, after noticing the oppression inflicted by the perversion of legal authority, says:⁠—‘Equally dangerous and equally detestable are the cruelties often exercised in private families, under the venerable sanction of parental authority.’ He continues:⁠—‘Even though no consideration should be paid to the great law of social beings, by which every individual is commanded to consult the happiness of others, yet the harsh parent is less to be vindicated than any other criminal, because he less provides for the happiness of himself.’ See also <i>post</i>, March 29, 1779. A passage in one of Boswell’s <i>Letters to Temple</i> (p. 111) may also be quoted here:⁠—‘The time was when such a letter from my father as the one I enclose would have depressed; but I am now firm, and, as my revered friend, Mr. Samuel Johnson, used to say, <i>I feel the privileges of an independent human being</i>; however, it is hard that I cannot have the pious satisfaction of being well with my father.’</p>
		<p>[1039] Perhaps ‘Van,’ for Vansittart.</p>
		<p>[1040] Lord Stowell informs me that Johnson prided himself in being, during his visits to Oxford, accurately academic in all points: and he wore his gown almost <i>ostentatiously</i>. CROKER.</p>
		<p>[1041] Dr. Robert Vansittart, of the ancient and respectable family of that name in Berkshire. He was eminent for learning and worth, and much esteemed by Dr. Johnson. BOSWELL. Johnson perhaps proposed climbing over the wall on the day on which ‘University College witnessed him drink three bottles of port without being the worse for it.’ <i>Post</i>, April 7, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1042] <i>Gentleman’s Magazine</i>, April, 1785. BOSWELL. The speech was made on July 7, 1759, the last day of ‘the solemnity of the installment’ of the Earl of Westmoreland as Chancellor of the University. On the 3rd ‘the ceremony began with a grand procession of noblemen, doctors, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, in their proper habits, which passed through St. Mary’s, and was there joined by the Masters of Arts in their proper habits; and from thence proceeded to the great gate of the Sheldonian Theatre, in which the most numerous and brilliant assembly of persons of quality and distinction was seated, that had ever been seen there on any occasion.’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxix. 342. Would that we had some description of Johnson, as, in his new and handsome gown, he joined the procession among the Masters! See <i>ante</i>, p. 281.</p>
		<p>[1043] <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>, 3d edit. p. 126 [Aug. 31]. BOSWELL. The chance of death from disease would seem also to have been greater on the ship than in a jail. In <i>The Idler</i> (No. 38) Johnson estimates that one in four of the prisoners dies every year. In his Review of Hanway’s <i>Essay on Tea</i> (<i>Works</i>, vi. 31) he states that he is told that ‘of the five or six hundred seamen sent to China, sometimes half, commonly a third part, perish in the voyage.’ See <i>post</i>, April 10, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1044] <i>Ibid</i>. p. 251 [Sept. 23]. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1045] In my first edition this word was printed <i>Chum</i>, as it appears, in one of Mr. Wilkes’s <i>Miscellanies</i>, and I animadverted on Dr. Smollet’s ignorance; for which let me propitiate the <i>manes</i> of that ingenious and benevolent gentleman. CHUM was certainly a mistaken reading for <i>Cham</i>, the title of the Sovereign of Tartary, which is well applied to Johnson, the Monarch of Literature; and was an epithet familiar to Smollet. See <i>Roderick Random</i>, chap. 56. For this correction I am indebted to Lord Palmerston, whose talents and literary acquirements accord well with his respectable pedigree of TEMPLE BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>After the publication of the second edition of this work, the author was furnished by Mr. Abercrombie, of Philadelphia, with the copy of a letter written by Dr. John Armstrong, the poet, to Dr. Smollet at Leghorne, containing the following paragraph:⁠—‘As to the K. Bench patriot, it is hard to say from what motive he published a letter of yours asking some triffling favour of him in behalf of somebody, for whom the great CHAM of literature, Mr. Johnson, had interested himself.’ MALONE. In the first edition Boswell had said:⁠—‘Had Dr. Smollet been bred at an English University, he would have know that a <i>chum</i> is a student who lives with another in a chamber common to them both. A <i>chum of literature</i> is nonsense.’</p>
		<p>[1046] In a note to that piece of bad book-making, Almon’s <i>Memoirs of Wilkes</i> (i. 47), this allusion is thus explained:-‘A pleasantry of Mr. Wilkes on that passage in Johnson’s <i>Grammar of the English Tongue</i>, prefixed to the Dictionary⁠—”<i>H</i> seldom, perhaps never, begins any but the first syllable.” ’ For this ‘pleasantry’ see <i>ante</i>, p. 300.</p>
		<p>[1047] Mr. Croker says that he was not discharged till June 1760. Had he been discharged at once he would have found Johnson moving from Gough Square to Staple Inn; for in a letter to Miss Porter, dated March 23, 1739, given in the Appendix, Johnson said:-‘I have this day moved my things, and you are now to direct to me at Staple Inn.’</p>
		<p>[1048] <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, pp. 30 [39] and 40. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1049] ‘I have left off housekeeping’ wrote Johnson to Langton on Jan. 9, 1759. Murphy (<i>Life</i>, p. 90), writing of the beginning of the year 1759, says:⁠—‘Johnson now found it necessary to retrench his expenses. He gave up his house in Gough Square. Mrs. Williams went into lodgings [See <i>post</i>, July 1, 1763]. He retired to Gray’s-Inn, [he had first moved to Staple Inn], and soon removed to chambers in the Inner Temple-lane, where he lived in poverty, total idleness, and the pride of literature, <i>Magni stat nominis umbra</i>. Mr. Fitzherbert used to say that he paid a morning visit to Johnson, intending from his chambers to send a letter into the city; but, to his great surprise, he found an authour by profession without pen, ink, or paper.’ (It was Mr. Fitzherbert, who sent Johnson some wine. See <i>ante</i>, p. 305, note 2. See also <i>post</i>, Sept. 15, 1777). The following documents confirm Murphy’s statement of Johnson’s poverty at this time:</p>
		<p>‘May 19, 1759.</p>
		<p>‘I promise to pay to Mr. Newbery the sum of forty-two pounds, nineteen shillings, and ten pence on demand, value received. £42 19 10.</p>
		<p>‘Sam. Johnson.’</p>
		<p>‘March 20, 1760.</p>
		<p>‘I promise to pay to Mr. Newbery the sum of thirty pounds upon demand., £30 0 0.</p>
		<p>‘Sam. Johnson.’</p>
		<p>In 1751 he had thrice borrowed money of Newbery, but the total amount of the loans was only four guineas. Prior’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 340. With Johnson’s want of pen, ink, and paper we may compare the account that he gives of Savage’s destitution (<i>Works</i>, viii. 3):⁠—‘Nor had he any other conveniences for study than the fields or the streets allowed him; there he used to walk and form his speeches, and afterwards step into a shop, beg for a few moments the use of the pen and ink, and write down what he had composed upon paper which he had picked up by accident.’ Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 383) says that Johnson’s chambers were two doors down the Inner Temple Lane. ‘I have been told,’ he continues, ‘by his neighbour at the corner, that during the time he dwelt there, more inquiries were made at his shop for Mr. Johnson, than for all the inhabitants put together of both the Inner and Middle Temple.’ In a court opening out of Fleet Street, Goldsmith at this very time was still more miserably lodged. In the beginning of March 1759, Percy found him ‘employed in writing his <i>Enquiry into Polite Learning</i> in a wretched dirty room, in which there was but one chair, and when he from civility offered it to his visitant, himself was obliged to sit in the window.’ <i>Goldsmith’s Misc. Works</i>, i. 61.</p>
		<p>[1050] Sir John Hawkins (Life, p. 373) has given a long detail of it, in that manner vulgarly, but significantly, called rigmarole; in which, amidst an ostentatious exhibition of arts and artists, he talks of ‘proportions of a column being taken from that of the human figure, and <i>adjusted by Nature</i>⁠—masculine and feminine⁠—in a man, sesquioctave of the head, and in a woman <i>sesquinonal</i>;’ nor has he failed to introduce a jargon of musical terms, which do not seem much to correspond with the subject, but serve to make up the heterogeneous mass. To follow the Knight through all this, would be an useless fatigue to myself, and not a little disgusting to my readers. I shall, therefore, only make a few remarks upon his statement.⁠—He seems to exult in having detected Johnson in procuring ‘from a person eminently skilled in Mathematicks and the principles of architecture, answers to a string of questions drawn up by himself, touching the comparative strength of semicircular and elliptical arches.’ Now I cannot conceive how Johnson could have acted more wisely. Sir John complains that the opinion of that excellent mathematician, Mr. Thomas Simpson, did not preponderate in favour of the semicircular arch. But he should have known, that however eminent Mr. Simpson was in the higher parts of abstract mathematical science, he was little versed in mixed and practical mechanicks. Mr. Muller, of Woolwich Academy, the scholastick father of all the great engineers which this country has employed for forty years, decided the question by declaring clearly in favour of the elliptical arch.</p>
		<p>It is ungraciously suggested, that Johnson’s motive for opposing Mr. Mylne’s scheme may have been his prejudice against him as a native of North Britain; when, in truth, as has been stated, he gave the aid of his able pen to a friend, who was one of the candidates; and so far was he from having any illiberal antipathy to Mr. Mylne, that he afterwards lived with that gentleman upon very agreeable terms of acquaintance, and dined with him at his house. Sir John Hawkins, indeed, gives full vent to his own prejudice in abusing Blackfriars bridge, calling it ‘an edifice, in which beauty and symmetry are in vain sought for; by which the citizens of London have perpetuated study their own disgrace, and subjected a whole nation to the reproach of foreigners.’ Whoever has contemplated, <i>placido lumine</i> [Horace, <i>Odes</i>, iv. 3, 2], this stately, elegant, and airy structure, which has so fine an effect, especially on approaching the capital on that quarter, must wonder at such unjust and ill-tempered censure; and I appeal to all foreigners of good taste, whether this bridge be not one of the most distinguished ornaments of London. As to the stability of the fabrick, it is certain that the City of London took every precaution to have the best Portland stone for it; but as this is to be found in the quarries belonging to the publick, under the direction of the Lords of the Treasury, it so happened that parliamentary interest, which is often the bane of fair pursuits, thwarted their endeavours. Notwithstanding this disadvantage, it is well known that not only has Blackfriars-bridge never sunk either in its foundation or in its arches, which were so much the subject of contest, but any injuries which it has suffered from the effects of severe frosts have been already, in some measure, repaired with sounder stone, and every necessary renewal can be completed at a moderate expence. BOSWELL. Horace Walpole mentions an ineffectual application made by the City to Parliament in 1764 ‘for more money for their new bridge at Blackfriars,’ when Dr. Hay, one of the Lords of the Admiralty, ‘abused the Common Council, whose late behaviour, he said, entitled them to no favour.’ Walpole’s <i>Memoirs of the Reign of George III</i>, i. 390. The late behaviour was the part taken by the City in Wilkes’s case. It was the same love of liberty no doubt that lost the City the Portland stone. Smollett goes out of the way to praise his brother-Scot, Mr. Mylne, in <i>Humphry Clinker</i>⁠—‘a party novel written,’ says Horace Walpole, ‘to vindicate the Scots’ (<i>Reign of George III</i>, iv. 328). In the letter dated May 29, he makes Mr. Bramble say:⁠—‘The Bridge at Blackfriars is a noble monument of taste and public spirit⁠—I wonder how they stumbled upon a work of such magnificence and utility.’</p>
		<p>[1051] Juvenal, <i>Sat</i>. i. 85.</p>
		<p>[1052] ‘Born and educated in this country, I glory in the name of Briton.’⁠—George III’s first speech to his parliament. It appears from the <i>Hardwicke Papers</i>, writes the editor of the _Parl. Hist. (xv. 982), that after the draft of the speech had been settled by the cabinet, these words and those that came next were added by the King’s own hand. Wilkes in his <i>Dedication of Mortimer</i> (see <i>post</i>, May 15, 1776) asserted that ‘these endearing words, “Born,<abbr>etc.</abbr>,” were permitted to be seen in the royal orthography of Britain for Briton,’ Almon’s <i>Works</i>, i. 84.</p>
		<p>[1053] In this <i>Introduction</i> (<i>Works</i>, vi. 148) Johnson answers objections that had been raised against the relief. ‘We know that for the prisoners of war there is no legal provision; we see their distress and are certain of its cause; we know that they are poor and naked, and poor and naked without a crime.⁠ ⁠… The opponents of this charity must allow it to be good, and will not easily prove it not to be the best. That charity is best of which the consequences are most extensive; the relief of enemies has a tendency to unite mankind in fraternal affection.’ The Committee for which Johnson’s paper was written began its work in Dec. 1759. In the previous month of October Wesley records in his _Journal (ii. 461):⁠—‘I walked up to Knowle, a mile from Bristol, to see the French prisoners. Above eleven hundred of them, we were informed, were confined in that little place, without anything to lie on but a little dirty straw, or anything to cover them but a few foul thin rags, either by day or by night, so that they died like rotten sheep. I was much affected, and preached in the evening on <i>Exodus</i> xxiii. 9.’ Money was at once contributed, and clothing bought. ‘It was not long before contributions were set on foot in various parts of the Kingdom.’ On Oct. 24 of the following year, he records:⁠—‘I visited the French prisoners at Knowle, and found many of them almost naked again.’ <i>Ib</i>. iii. 23. ‘The prisoners,’ wrote Hume (<i>Private Corres</i>. p. 55), ‘received food from the public, but it was thought that their own friends would supply them with clothes, which, however, was found after some time to be neglected.’ The cry arose that the brave and gallant men, though enemies, were perishing with cold in prison; a subscription was set on foot; great sums were given by all ranks of people; and, notwithstanding the national foolish prejudices against the French, a remarkable zeal everywhere appeared for this charity. I am afraid that M. Rousseau could not have produced many parallel instances among his heroes, the Greeks; and still fewer among the Romans. Baretti, in his <i>Journey from London to Genoa</i> (i. 62, 66), after telling how on all foreigners, even on a Turk wearing a turban, ‘the pretty appellation of <i>French dog</i> was liberally bestowed by the London rabble,’ continues:⁠—‘I have seen the populace of England contribute as many shillings as they could spare towards the maintenance of the French prisoners; and I have heard a universal shout of joy when their parliament voted £100,000 to the Portuguese on hearing of the tremendous earthquake.’</p>
		<p>[1054] Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 81. See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 16, 1773, where Johnson describes Mary as ‘such a Queen as every man of any gallantry of spirit would have sacrificed his life for.’ ‘There are,’ wrote Hume, ‘three events in our history which may be regarded as touchstones of party-men. An English Whig who asserts the reality of the popish plot, an Irish Catholic who denies the massacre in 1641, and a Scotch Jacobite who maintains the innocence of Queen Mary, must be considered as men beyond the reach of argument or reason, and must be left to their prejudices.’ <i>History of England</i>, ed. 1802, v. 504.</p>
		<p>[1055] <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, p. 42. BOSWELL. The following is his entry on this day:⁠—</p>
		<p>’1760, Sept. 18. Resolved D[eo]j[uvante]’<br/>
		To combat notions of obligation.<br/>
		To apply to study.<br/>
		To reclaim imagination.<br/>
		To consult the resolves on Tetty’s coffin.<br/>
		To rise early.<br/>
		To study religion.<br/>
		To go to church.<br/>
		To drink less strong liquors.<br/>
		To keep a journal.<br/>
		To oppose laziness, by doing what is to be done tomorrow.<br/>
		Rise as early as I can.<br/>
		Send for books for Hist. of War.<br/>
		Put books in order.<br/>
		Scheme of life.’<br/></p>
		<p>[1056] See <i>post</i>, Oct. 19, 1769, and May 15, 1783, for Johnson’s measure of emotion, by eating.</p>
		<p>[1057] Mr. Croker points out that Murphy’s <i>Epistle</i> was an imitation of Boileau’s <i>Epître à Molière</i>.</p>
		<p>[1058] The paper mentioned in the text is No. 38 of the second series of the <i>Grays Inn Journal</i>, published on June 15, 1754; which is a translation from the French version of Johnson’s <i>Rambler</i>, No. 190. MALONE. Mrs. Piozzi relates how Murphy, used to tell before Johnson of the first time they met. He found our friend all covered with soot, like a chimney-sweeper, in a little room, with an intolerable heat and strange smell, as if he had been acting Lungs in the <i>Alchymist</i>, making aether. ‘Come, come,’ says Dr. Johnson, ‘dear Murphy, the story is black enough now; and it was a very happy day for me that brought you first to my house, and a very happy mistake about the Ramblers.’ Piozzi’s <i>Anec</i>. p. 235. Murphy quotes her account, Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 79. See also <i>post</i>, 1770, where Dr. Maxwell records in his <i>Collectanea</i> how Johnson ‘very much loved Arthur Murphy.’ Miss Burney thus describes him:⁠—‘He is tall and well-made, has a very gentlemanlike appearance, and a quietness of manner upon his first address that to me is very pleasing. His face looks sensible, and his deportment is perfectly easy and polite.’ A few days later she records:⁠—‘Mr. Murphy was the life of the party; he was in good spirits, and extremely entertaining; he told a million of stories admirably well.’ Mme. D’Arblay’s <i>Diary</i>, i. 195, 210. Rogers, who knew Murphy well, says that ‘towards the close of his life, till he received a pension of £200 from the King, he was in great pecuniary difficulties. He had eaten himself out of every tavern from the other side of Temple-Bar to the west end of the town.’ He owed Rogers a large sum of money, which he never repaid. ‘He assigned over to me the whole of his works; and I soon found that he had already disposed of them to a bookseller. One thing,’ Rogers continues, ‘ought to be remembered to his honour; an actress with whom he had lived bequeathed to him all her property, but he gave up every farthing of it to her relations.’ He was pensioned in 1803, and he died in 1805. Rogers’s <i>Table-Talk</i>, p. 106.</p>
		<p>[1059] Topham Beauclerk, Esq. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1060] Essays with that title, written about this time by Mr. Langton, but not published. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1061] Thomas Sheridan, born 1721, died 1788. He was the son of Swift’s friend, and the father of R. B. Sheridan (who was born in 1751), and the great-great-grandfather of the present Earl of Dufferin.</p>
		<p>[1062] Sheridan was acting in Garrick’s Company, generally on the nights on which Garrick did not appear. Davies’s <i>Garrick</i>, i. 299. Johnson criticises his reading, <i>post</i>, April 18, 1783.</p>
		<p>[1063] Mrs. Sheridan was authour of <i>Memoirs of Miss Sydney Biddulph</i>, a novel of great merit, and of some other pieces.⁠—See her character, <i>post</i>, beginning of 1763. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1064] <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, p. 44. BOSWELL. ’1761. Easter Eve. Since the communion of last Easter I have led a life so dissipated and useless, and my terrours and perplexities have so much increased, that I am under great depression and discouragement.’</p>
		<p>[1065] See <i>post</i>, April 6, 1775.</p>
		<p>[1066] I have had inquiry made in Ireland as to this story, but do not find it recollected there. I give it on the authority of Dr. Johnson, to which may be added that of the <i>biographical Dictionary</i>, and <i>Biographia Dramatica</i>; in both of which it has stood many years. Mr. Malone observes, that the truth probably is, not that an edition was published with Rolt’s name in the title-page, but, that the poem being then anonymous, Rolt acquiesced in its being attributed to him in conversation. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1067] I have both the books. Innes was the clergyman who brought Psalmanazar to England, and was an accomplice in his extraordinary fiction. BOSWELL. It was in 1728 that Innes, who was a Doctor of Divinity and Preacher-Assistant at St. Margaret’s Westminster, published this book. In his impudent Dedication to Lord Chancellor King he says that ‘were matters once brought to the melancholy pass that mankind should become proselytes to such impious delusions’ as Mandeville taught, ‘punishments must be annexed to virtue and rewards to vice.’ It was not till 1730 that Dr. Campbell ‘laid open this imposture.’ Preface, p. xxxi. Though he was Professor of Ecclesiastical History in St. Andrews, yet he had not, it should seem, heard of the fraud till then: so remote was Scotland from London in those days. It was not till 1733 that he published his own edition. For Psalmanazar, see <i>post</i>, April 18, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1068] ‘Died, the Rev. Mr. Eccles, at Bath. In attempting to save a boy, whom he saw sinking in the Avon, he, together with the youth, were both drowned.’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>. Aug. 15, 1777. And in the magazine for the next month are some verses on this event, with an epitaph, of which the first line is,</p>
		<p>‘Beneath this stone the “<i>Man of<br/>
		 Feeling</i>” lies.’<br/></p>
		<h5>CROKER.</h5>
		<p>[1069] ‘Harry Mackenzie,’ wrote Scott in 1814, ‘never put his name in a title page till the last edition of his works.’ Lockhart’s <i>Scott</i>, iv. 178. He wrote also <i>The Man of the World</i>, which Johnson ‘looked at, but thought there was nothing in it.’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 2, 1773. Scott, however, called it ‘a very pathetic tale.’ Croker’s _Boswell, p. 359. Burns, writing of his twenty-third year, says: ‘<i>Tristram Shandy</i> and the <i>Man of Feeling</i> were my bosom favourites.’ Currie’s <i>Life of Burns</i>, ed.1846. p. 21.</p>
		<p>[1070] From the Prologue to Dryden’s adaptation of <i>The Tempest</i>.</p>
		<p>[1071] The originals of Dr. Johnson’s three letters to Mr. baretti, which are among the very best he ever wrote, were communicated to the elegant monthly miscellany, <i>The European Magazine</i>, in which they first appeared. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1072] Baretti left London for Lisbon on Aug. 14, 1760. He went through Portugal, Spain, and France to Antibes, whence he went by sea to Genoa, where he arrived on Nov. 18. In 1770 he published a lively account of his travels under the title of <i>A Journey from London to Genoa</i>.</p>
		<p>[1073] Malone says of Baretti that ‘he was certainly a man of extraordinary talents, and perhaps no one ever made himself so completely master of a foreign language as he did of English.’ Prior’s <i>Malone</i>, p. 392. Mrs. Piozzi gives the following ‘instance of his skill in our low street language. Walking in a field near Chelsea he met a fellow, who, suspecting him from dress and manner to be a foreigner, said sneeringly, “Come, Sir, will you show me the way to France?” “No, Sir,” says Baretti instantly, “but I will show you the way to Tyburn.” ’ He travelled with her in France. ‘Oh how he would court the maids at the inns abroad, abuse the men perhaps, and that with a facility not to be exceeded, as they all confessed, by any of the natives. But so he could in Spain, I find.’ Hayward’s <i>Piozzi</i>, ii. 347.</p>
		<p>[1074] Johnson was intimate with Lord Southwell, <i>ante</i>, p. 243. It seems unlikely that Baretti merely conducted Mr. Southwell from Turin to Venice; yet there is not a line in his <i>Journey</i> to show that any Englishman accompanied him from London to Turin.</p>
		<p>[1075] See <i>ante</i>, p. 350, note.</p>
		<p>[1076] The first of these annual exhibitions was opened on April 21, 1760, at the Room of the Society of Arts, in the Strand. ‘As a consequence of their success, grew the incorporation of a Society of Artists in 1765, by seccession from which finally was constituted the Royal Academy [In Dec. 1768].’ Taylor’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 179. For the third exhibition Johnson wrote the Preface to the catalogue. In this, speaking for the Committee of the Artists he says:⁠—‘The purpose of this Exhibition is not to enrich the artist, but to advance the art; the eminent are not flattered with preference, nor the obscure insulted with contempt; whoever hopes to deserve public favour is here invited to display his merit.’ Northcote’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 101.</p>
		<p>[1077] Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 318) says that Johnson told him ‘that in his whole life he was never capable of discerning the least resemblance of any kind between a picture and the subject it was intended to represent.’ This, however must have been an exaggeration on the part either of Hawkins or Johnson. His general ignorance of art is shown by Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>., p. 98):⁠—‘Sir Joshua Reynolds mentioned some picture as excellent. “It has often grieved me, sir,” said Mr. Johnson, “to see so much mind as the science of painting requires, laid out upon such perishable materials: why do not you oftener make use of copper? I could wish your superiority in the art you profess to be preserved in stuff more durable than canvas.” Sir Joshua urged the difficulty of procuring a plate large enough for historical subjects. “What foppish obstacles are these!” exclaims on a sudden Dr. Johnson. “Here is Thrale has a thousand tun of copper; you may paint it all round if you will, I suppose; it will serve him to brew in afterwards. Will it not, Sir?” to my husband who sat by. Indeed his utter scorn of painting was such, that I have heard him say, that he should sit very quietly in a room hung round with the works of the greatest masters, and never feel the slightest disposition to turn them, if their backs were outermost, unless it might be for the sake of telling Sir Joshua that he <i>had</i> turned them.’ Such a remark of Johnson’s must not, however, be taken too strictly. He often spoke at random, often with exaggeration. ‘There is in many minds a kind of vanity exerted to the disadvantage of themselves.’ This reflection of his is the opening sentence to the number of the Idler (No. 45) in which he thus writes about portrait-painting:⁠—‘Genius is chiefly exerted in historical pictures; and the art of the painter of portraits is often lost in the obscurity of his subject. But it is in painting as in life; what is greatest is not always best. I should grieve to see Reynolds transfer to heroes and to goddesses, to empty splendour and to airy fiction, that art which is now employed in diffusing friendship, in reviving tenderness, in quickening the affections of the absent, and continuing the presence of the dead.’ It is recorded in Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, (1787) xi. 208, that ‘Johnson, talking with some persons about allegorical painting said, “I had rather see the portrait of a dog that I know than all the allegorical paintings they can show me in the world.” ’ He bought prints of Burke, Dyer, and Goldsmith⁠—‘Good impressions’ he said to hang in a little room that he was fitting up with prints. Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, p. 639. Among his effects that were sold after his death were ‘sixty-one portraits framed and glazed,’ <i>post</i>, under Dec. 9, 1784. When he was at Paris, and saw the picture-gallery at the Palais Royal, he entered in his Diary:⁠—‘I thought the pictures of Raphael fine;’ <i>post</i>, Oct. 16, 1775. The philosopher Hume was more insensible even than Johnson. Dr. J.H. Burton says:⁠—‘It does not appear from any incident in his life, or allusions in his letters, which I can remember, that he had ever really admired a picture or a statue.’ <i>Life of me</i>, ii. 134.</p>
		<p>[1078] By Colman⁠—‘There is nothing else new,’ wrote Horace Walpole on March 7, 1761 (<i>Letters,</i> in. 382), ‘but a very indifferent play, called <i>The Jealous Wife</i>, so well acted as to have succeeded greatly.’</p>
		<p>[1079] In Chap. 47 of <i>Rasselas</i> Johnson had lately considered monastic life. Imlac says of the monks:⁠—‘Their time is regularly distributed; one duty succeeds another, so that they are not left open to the distraction of unguided choice, nor lost in the shades of listless inactivity.⁠ ⁠… He that lives well in the world is better than he that lives well in a monastery. But perhaps every one is not able to stem the temptations of publick life; and, if he cannot conquer, he may properly retreat.’ See also <i>post</i>, March 15, 1776, and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 19, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1080] Baretti, in the preface to his <i>Journey</i> (p. vi.), says that the method of the book was due to Dr. Johnson. ‘It was he that exhorted me to write daily, and with all possible minuteness; it was he that pointed out the topics which would most interest and most delight in a future publication.’</p>
		<p>[1081] He advised Boswell to go to Spain. <i>Post</i>, June 25 and July 26, 1763.</p>
		<p>[1082] Dr. Percy records that ‘the first visit Goldsmith ever received from Johnson was on May 31, 1761, [ten days before this letter was written] when he gave an invitation to him, and much other company, many of them literary men, to a supper in his lodgings in Wine Office Court, Fleet Street. Percy being intimate with Johnson, was desired to call upon him and take him with him. As they went together the former was much struck with the studied neatness of Johnson’s dress. He had on a new suit of clothes, a new wig nicely powdered, and everything about him so perfectly dissimilar from his usual appearance that his companion could not help inquiring the cause of this singular transformation. “Why, Sir,” said Johnson, “I hear that Goldsmith, who is a very great sloven, justifies his disregard of cleanliness and decency by quoting my practice, and I am desirous this night to show him a better example.” ’ Goldsmith’s <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 62.</p>
		<p>[1083] <i>Judges</i>, v. 20.</p>
		<p>[1084] <i>Psalms</i>, xix. 2.</p>
		<p>[1085] <i>Psalms</i>, civ. 19.</p>
		<p>[1086] Boswell is ten years out in his date. This work was published in 1752. The review of it in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for that year, p. 146, was, I believe, by Johnson.</p>
		<p>[1087] He accompanied Lord Macartney on his embassy to China in 1792. In 1797 he published his <i>Account of the Embassy</i>.</p>
		<p>[1088] It was taken in 1759, and restored to France in 1763. <i>Penny Cyclo</i>. xi. 463.</p>
		<p>[1089] W. S. Landor (<i>Works</i>, ed. 1876, v. 99) says:⁠—‘Extraordinary as were Johnson’s intellectual powers, he knew about as much of poetry as of geography. In one of his letters he talks of Guadaloupe as being in another hemisphere. Speaking of that island, his very words are these: “Whether you return hither or stay in another hemisphere.” ’ Guadaloupe, being in the West Indies, is in another hemisphere.</p>
		<p>[1090] See <i>post</i>, April 12, 1776.</p>
		<p>[1091] ‘It is necessary to hope, though hope should always be deluded; for hope itself is happiness, and its frustrations, however frequent, are less dreadful than its extinction.’ <i>The Idler</i>, No. 58. See also <i>post</i>, under March 30, 1783, where he ranks the situation of the Prince of Wales as the happiest in the kingdom, partly on account of the enjoyment of hope.</p>
		<p>[1092] Though Johnson wrote this same day to Lord Bute to thank him for his pension, he makes no mention to Baretti of this accession to his fortune.</p>
		<p>[1093] See <i>ante</i>, p. 245. Mrs. Porter, the actress, lived some time with Mrs. Cotterel and her eldest daughter. CROKER.</p>
		<p>[1094] Miss Charlotte Cotterel, married to Dean Lewis. See <i>post</i>, Dec. 21, 1762.</p>
		<p>[1095] Reynolds’s note-book shows that this year he had close on 150 sitters. Taylor’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 218.</p>
		<p>[1096] He married a woman of the town, who had persuaded him (notwithstanding their place of congress was a small coalshed in Fetter Lane) that she was nearly related to a man of fortune, but was injuriously kept by him out of large possessions. She regarded him as a physician already in considerable practice. He had not been married four months, before a writ was taken out against him for debts incurred by his wife. He was secreted; and his friend then procured him a protection from a foreign minister. In a short time afterwards she ran away from him, and was tried (providentially in his opinion) for picking pockets at the Old Bailey. Her husband was with difficulty prevented from attending the Court, in the hope she would be hanged. She pleaded her own cause and was acquitted. A separation between them took place.’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>. lv. 101.</p>
		<p>[1097] Richardson had died more than a year earlier⁠—on July 4, 1761. That Johnson should think it needful at the date of his letter to inform Baretti of the death of so famous a writer shows how slight was the communication between London and Milan. Nay, he repeats the news in his letter of Dec. 21, 1762.</p>
		<p>[1098] On Dec. 8, 1765, he wrote to Hector:⁠—‘A few years ago I just saluted Birmingham, but had no time to see any friend, for I came in after midnight with a friend, and went away in the morning.’ <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S. iii. 321. He passed through Birmingham, I conjecture, on his visit to Lichfield.</p>
		<p>[1099] Writing to Mrs. Thrale from Lichfield on July 20, 1767, he says:⁠—‘Miss Lucy [Porter, his step-daughter, not his daughter-in-law, as he calls her above] is more kind and civil than I expected, and has raised my esteem by many excellencies very noble and resplendent, though a little discoloured by hoary virginity. Everything else recalls to my remembrance years, in which I proposed what I am afraid I have not done, and promised myself pleasure which I have not found.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 4.</p>
		<p>[1100] In his <i>Journey into Wales</i> (Aug. 24, 1774), he describes how Mrs. Thrale visited one of the scenes of her youth. ‘She remembered the rooms, and wandered over them with recollection of her childhood. This species of pleasure is always melancholy. The walk was cut down and the pond was dry. Nothing was better.’</p>
		<p>[1101] This is a very just account of the relief which London affords to melancholy minds. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1102] To Devonshire.</p>
		<p>[1103] See <i>ante</i>, p. 322.</p>
		<p>[1104] Dr. T. Campbell (<i>Diary of a visit to England</i>, p. 32) recorded on March 16, 1775, that ‘Baretti said that now he could not live out of London. He had returned a few years ago to his own country, but he could not enjoy it; and he was obliged to return to London to those connections he had been making for near thirty years past.’ Baretti had come to England in 1750 (<i>ante</i>, p. 302), so that thirty years is an exaggeration.</p>
		<p>[1105] How great a sum this must have been in Johnson’s eyes is shown by a passage in his <i>Life of Savage</i> (<i>Works</i>, viii. 125). Savage, he says, was received into Lord Tyrconnel’s family and allowed a pension of £200 a year. ‘His presence,’ Johnson writes, ‘was sufficient to make any place of publick entertainment popular; and his approbation and example constituted the fashion. So powerful is genius when it is invested with the glitter of affluence!’ In the last summer of his life, speaking of the chance of his pension being doubled, he said that with six hundred a year ‘a man would have the consciousness that he should pass the remainder of his life <i>in splendour</i>, how long soever it might be.’ <i>Post</i>, June 30, 1784. David Hume writing in 1751, says:⁠—‘I have £50 a year, a £100 worth of books, great store of linens and fine clothes, and near £100 in my pocket; along with order, frugality, a strong spirit of independency, good health, a contented humour, and an unabating love of study. In these circumstances I must esteem myself one of the happy and fortunate.’ J. H. Burton’s <i>Hume</i>, i. 342. Goldsmith, in his <i>Present State of Polite Learning</i> (chap, vii), makes the following observation on pensions granted in France to authors:⁠—‘The French nobility have certainly a most pleasing way of satisfying the vanity of an author without indulging his avarice. A man of literary merit is sure of being caressed by the great, though seldom enriched. His pension from the crown just supplies half a competence, and the sale of his labours makes some small addition to his circumstances; thus the author leads a life of splendid poverty, and seldom becomes wealthy or indolent enough to discontinue an exertion of those abilities by which he rose.’ Whether Johnson’s pension led to his writing less than he would otherwise have done may be questioned. It is true that in the next seventeen years he did little more than finish his edition of <i>Shakespeare</i>, and write his <i>Journey to the Western Islands</i> and two or three political pamphlets. But since he wrote the last number of <i>The Idler</i> in the spring of 1760 he had done very little. His mind, which, to use Murphy’s words (<i>Life</i>, p. 80), had been ‘strained and overlaboured by constant exertion,’ had not recovered its tone. It is likely, that without the pension he would not have lived to write the second greatest of his works⁠—the <i>Lives of the Poets</i>.</p>
		<p>[1106] Mr. Forster (<i>Life of Goldsmith</i>, i. 281) says:⁠—‘Bute’s pensions to his Scottish crew showing meaner than ever in Churchill’s daring verse, it occurred to the shrewd and wary Wedderburne to advise, for a set off, that Samuel Johnson should be pensioned.’ <i>The Prophecy of Famine</i> in which Churchill’s attack was made on the pensioned Scots was published in Jan. 1763, nearly half a year after Johnson’s pension was conferred.</p>
		<p>[1107] For his <i>Falkland’s Islands</i> ‘materials were furnished to him by the ministry’ (<i>post</i>, 1771). ‘<i>The Patriot</i> was called for,’ he writes, ‘by my political friends’ (<i>post</i>, Nov. 26, 1774). ‘That <i>Taxation no Tyranny</i> was written at the desire of those who were then in power, I have no doubt,’ writes Boswell (<i>post</i>, under March 21, 1775). ‘Johnson complained to a friend that, his pension having been given to him as a literary character, he had been applied to by administration to write political pamphlets’ (<i>Ib</i>.). Are these statements inconsistent with what Lord Loughborough said, and with Boswell’s assertion (<i>Ib</i>.) that ‘Johnson neither asked nor received from government any reward whatsoever for his political labours?’ I think not. I think that, had Johnson unpensioned been asked by the Ministry to write these pamphlets, he would have written them. He would have been pleased by the compliment, and for pay would have trusted to the sale. Speaking of the first two of these pamphlets⁠—the third had not yet appeared⁠—he said, ‘Except what I had from the booksellers, I did not get a farthing by them’ (<i>post</i>, March 21, 1772). They had not cost him much labour. <i>The False Alarm</i> was written between eight o’clock of one night and twelve o’clock of the next. It went through three editions in less than two months (<i>post</i>, 1770). <i>The Patriot</i> was written on a Saturday (<i>post</i>, Nov. 26, 1774). At all events Johnson had received his pension for more than seven years before he did any work for the ministry. In Croft’s <i>Life of Young</i>, which Johnson adopted (<i>Works</i>, viii. 422), the following passage was perhaps intended to be a defence of Johnson as a writer for the Ministry:⁠—‘Yet who shall say with certainty that Young was a pensioner? In all modern periods of this country, have not the writers on one side been regularly called hirelings, and on the other patriots?’</p>
		<p>[1108] See <i>ante</i>, p. 294.</p>
		<p>[1109] Murphy’s account is nearly as follows (<i>Life</i>, p. 92):⁠—‘Lord Loughborough was well acquainted with Johnson; but having heard much of his independent spirit, and of the downfall of Osborne the bookseller (<i>ante</i>, p. 154), he did not know but his benevolence might be rewarded with a folio on his head. He desired me to undertake the task. I went to the chambers in the Inner Temple Lane, which, in fact, were the abode of wretchedness. By slow and studied approaches the message was disclosed. Johnson made a long pause; he asked if it was seriously intended. He fell into a profound meditation, and his own definition of a pensioner occurred to him. He desired to meet next day, and dine at the Mitre Tavern. At that meeting he gave up all his scruples. On the following day Lord Loughborough conducted him to the Earl of Bute. The conversation that passed was in the evening related to me by Dr. Johnson. He expressed his sense of his Majesty’s bounty, and thought himself the more highly honoured, as the favour was not bestowed on him for having dipped his pen in faction. “No, Sir,” said Lord Bute, “it is not offered to you for having dipped your pen in faction, nor with a design that you ever should.” ’ The reviewer of Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i> in the <i>Monthly Review</i>, lxxvi. 375, who was, no doubt, Murphy, adds a little circumstance:⁠—‘On the next day Mr. Murphy was in the Temple Lane soon after nine; <i>he got Johnson up and dressed in due time</i>; and saw him set off at eleven.’ Malone’s note on what Lord Bute said to Johnson is as follows:⁠—‘This was said by Lord Bute, as Dr. Burney was informed by Johnson himself, in answer to a question which he put, previously to his acceptance of the intended bounty: “Pray, my Lord, what am I expected to do for this pension?” ’</p>
		<p>[1110]</p>
		<p>‘In Britain’s senate he a seat obtains<br/>
		And one more pensioner St. Stephen gains.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>Moral Essays</i>, iii. 392.</p>
		<p>Johnson left the definition of <i>pension</i> and <i>pensioner</i> unchanged in the fourth edition of the <i>Dictionary</i>, corrected by him in 1773.</p>
		<p>[1111] He died on March 10, 1792. This paragraph and the letter are not in the first two editions.</p>
		<p>[1112] The Treasury, Home Office, Exchequer of Receipt and Audit Office Records have been searched for a warrant granting a pension to Dr. Johnson without success. In 1782, by Act of Parliament all pensions on the Civil List Establishment were from that time to be paid at the Exchequer. In the Exchequer Order Book, Michaelmas 1782, No. 46, p. 74, the following memorandum occurs:⁠—“Memdum. 3 Dec. 1782. There was issued to the following persons (By order 6th of Nov. 1782) the sums set against their names respectively, etc.:⁠—Persons names: Johnson Saml, LL.D. Pensions p. ann. £300. Due to 5 July 1782, two quarters, £150.”</p>
		<p>This pension was paid at the Exchequer from that time to the quarter ending 10 Oct. 1784. ‘It is clear that the pension was payable quarterly [for confirmation of this, see <i>post</i>, Nov. 3, 1762, and July 16, 1765] and at the old quarter days, July 5, Oct. 10, Jan. 5, April 5, though payment was sometimes delayed. [Once he was paid half-yearly; see <i>post</i>, under March 20, 1771.] The expression “bills” was a general term at the time for notes, cheques, and warrants, and no doubt covered some kind of Treasury warrant.’ The above information I owe to the kindness of my friend Mr. Leonard H. Courtney, M.P., late Financial Secretary to the Treasury. The ‘future favours’ are the future payments. His pension was not for life, and depended therefore entirely on the king’s pleasure (see <i>post</i>, under March 21, 1775). The following letter in the <i>Grenville Papers</i>, ii. 68, seems to show that Johnson thought the pension due on the <i>new</i> quarter-day:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘DR. JOHNSON To MR. GRENVILLE.</p>
		<p>‘July 2, 1763.</p>
		<h5>‘SIR,</h5>
		<p>‘Be pleased to pay to the bearer seventy-five pounds, being the quarterly payment of a pension granted by his Majesty, and due on the 24th day of June last, to Sir,</p>
		<p>‘Your most humble servant,</p>
		<h5>‘SAM. JOHNSON.’</h5>
		<p>[1113] They left London on Aug. 16 and returned to it on Sept. 26. Taylor’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 214. Northcote records of this visit:⁠—‘I remember when Mr. Reynolds was pointed out to me at a public meeting, where a great crowd was assembled, I got as near to him as I could from the pressure of the people to touch the skirt of his coat, which I did with great satisfaction to my mind.’ Northcote’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 116. In like manner Reynolds, when a youth, had in a great crowd touched the hand of Pope. <i>Ib</i>, p. 19. Pope, when a boy of eleven, ‘persuaded some friends to take him to the coffee-house which Dryden frequented.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 236. Who touched old Northcote’s hand? Has the apostolic succession been continued?⁠—Since writing these lines I have read with pleasure the following passage in Mr. Ruskin’s <i>Praeterita</i>, chapter i. p. 16:⁠—‘When at three-and-a-half I was taken to have my portrait painted by Mr. Northcote, I had not been ten minutes alone with him before I asked him why there were holes in his carpet.’ Dryden, Pope, Reynolds, Northcote, Ruskin, so runs the chain of genius, with only one weak link in it.</p>
		<p>[1114] At one of these seats Dr. Amyat, Physician in London, told me he happened to meet him. In order to amuse him till dinner should be ready, he was taken out to walk in the garden. The master of the house, thinking it proper to introduce something scientifick into the conversation, addressed him thus: ‘Are you a botanist, Dr. Johnson:’ ‘No, Sir, (answered Johnson,) I am not a botanist; and, (alluding no doubt, to his near sightedness) should I wish to become a botanist, I must first turn myself into a reptile.’ BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1115] Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. 285) says:⁠—‘The roughness of the language used on board a man of war, where he passed a week on a visit to Captain Knight, disgusted him terribly. He asked an officer what some place was called, and received for answer that it was where the loplolly man kept his loplolly; a reply he considered as disrespectful, gross and ignorant.’ Mr. Croker says that Captain Knight of the <i>Belleisle</i> lay for a couple of months in 1762 in Plymouth Sound. Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, p. 480. It seems unlikely that Johnson passed a whole week on ship-board. <i>Loplolly</i>, or <i>Loblolly</i>, is explained in <i>Roderick Random</i>, chap. xxvii. Roderick, when acting as the surgeon’s assistant on a man of war, ‘suffered,’ he says, ‘from the rude insults of the sailors and petty officers, among whom I was known by the name of <i>Lobolly Boy</i>.’</p>
		<p>[1116] He was the father of Colonel William Mudge, distinguished by his trigonometrical survey of England and Wales. WRIGHT.</p>
		<p>[1117] ‘I have myself heard Reynolds declare, that the elder Mr. Mudge was, in his opinion, the wisest man he had ever met with in his life. He has always told me that he owed his first disposition to generalise, and to view things in the abstract, to him.’ Northcote’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 112, 115.</p>
		<p>[1118] See <i>post</i>, under March 20, 1781.</p>
		<p>[1119] See <i>ante</i>, p. 293. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1120] The present Devonport.</p>
		<p>[1121] A friend of mine once heard him, during this visit, exclaim with the utmost vehemence ‘I <i>hate</i> a Docker.’ BLAKEWAY. Northcote (Life of Reynolds, i. 118) says that Reynolds took Johnson to dine at a house where ‘he devoured so large a quantity of new honey and of clouted cream, besides drinking large potations of new cyder, that the entertainer found himself much embarrassed between his anxious regard for the Doctor’s health and his fear of breaking through the rules of politeness, by giving him a hint on the subject. The strength of Johnson’s constitution, however, saved him from any unpleasant consequences.’ ‘Sir Joshua informed a friend that he had never seen Dr. Johnson intoxicated by hard drinking but once, and that happened at the time that they were together in Devonshire, when one night after supper Johnson drank three bottles of wine, which affected his speech so much that he was unable to articulate a hard word, which occurred in the course of his conversation. He attempted it three times but failed; yet at last accomplished it, and then said, “Well, Sir Joshua, I think it is now time to go to bed.” ’ <i>Ib</i>. ii. 161. One part of this story however is wanting in accuracy, and therefore all may be untrue. Reynolds at this time was not knighted. Johnson said (<i>post</i>, April 7, 1778): ‘I did not leave off wine because I could not bear it; I have drunk three bottles of port without being the worse for it. University College has witnessed this.’ See however <i>post</i>, April 24, 1779, where he said:⁠—‘I used to slink home when I had drunk too much;’ also <i>ante</i>, p. 103, and <i>post</i>, April 28, 1783.</p>
		<p>[1122] George Selwyn wrote:⁠—‘Topham Beauclerk is arrived. I hear he lost £10,000 to a thief at Venice, which thief, in the course of the year, will be at Cashiobury.’ (The reference to this quotation I have mislaid.)</p>
		<p>[1123] Two years later he repeated this thought in the lines that he added to Goldsmith’s <i>Traveller</i>. <i>Post</i>, under Feb. 1766.</p>
		<p>[1124] We may compare with this what ‘old Bentley’ said:⁠—‘Depend upon it, no man was ever written down but by himself.’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 1, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1125] The preliminaries of peace between England and France had been signed on Nov. 3 of this year. <i>Ann Reg</i>. v. 246.</p>
		<p>[1126] Of Baretti’s <i>Travels through Spain, &amp;c</i>., Johnson wrote to Mrs. Thrale:⁠—‘That Baretti’s book would please you all I made no doubt. I know not whether the world has ever seen such <i>Travels</i> before. Those whose lot it is to ramble can seldom write, and those who know how to write very seldom ramble.’ <i>Piozzi</i> Letters, i. 32.</p>
		<p>[1127] See <i>ante</i>, p. 370.</p>
		<p>[1128] See <i>ante</i>, p. 242, note 1.</p>
		<p>[1129] Huggins had quarrelled with Johnson and Baretti (Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, 129, note). See also <i>post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton’s <i>Collection</i>.</p>
		<p>[1130] See <i>ante</i>, p. 370.</p>
		<p>[1131] Cowper, writing in 1784 about Collins, says:⁠—‘Of whom I did not know that he existed till I found him there’⁠—in the <i>Lives of the Poets</i>, that is to say. Southey’s <i>Cowper</i>, v. II.</p>
		<p>[1132] To this passage Johnson, nearly twenty years later, added the following (<i>Works</i>, viii. 403):⁠—‘Such was the fate of Collins, with whom I once delighted to converse, and whom I yet remember with tenderness.’</p>
		<p>[1133] ‘MADAM. To approach the high and the illustrious has been in all ages the privilege of Poets; and though translators cannot justly claim the same honour, yet they naturally follow their authours as attendants; and I hope that in return for having enabled TASSO to diffuse his fame through the British dominions, I may be introduced by him to the presence of YOUR MAJESTY.</p>
		<p>TASSO has a peculiar claim to YOUR MAJESTY’S favour, as follower and panegyrist of the House of <i>Este</i>, which has one common ancestor with the House of HANOVER; and in reviewing his life it is not easy to forbear a wish that he had lived in a happier time, when he might, among the descendants of that illustrious family, have found a more liberal and potent patronage.</p>
		<p>I cannot but observe, MADAM, how unequally reward is proportioned to merit, when I reflect that the happiness which was withheld from TASSO is reserved for me; and that the poem which once hardly procured to its authour the countenance of the Princess of Ferrara, has attracted to its translator the favourable notice of a BRITISH QUEEN.</p>
		<p>Had this been the fate of TASSO, he would have been able to have celebrated the condescension of YOUR MAJESTY in nobler language, but could not have felt it with more ardent gratitude, than MADAM, Your MAJESTY’S Most faithful and devoted servant.’⁠—BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1134] Young though Boswell was, he had already tried his hand at more than one kind of writing. In 1761 he had published anonymously an <i>Elegy on the Death of an Amiable Young Lady</i>, with an <i>Epistle from Menalcas to Lycidas</i>. (Edinburgh, Donaldson.) The Elegy is full of such errors as ‘Thou liv’d,’ ‘Thou led,’ but is recommended by a puffing preface and three letters⁠—one of which is signed J⁠—B. About the same time he brought out a piece that was even more impudent. It was <i>An Ode to Tragedy</i>. By a gentleman of Scotland. (Edinburgh, Donaldson, 1761. Price sixpence.) In the ‘Dedication to James Boswell, Esq.,’ he says:⁠—‘I have no intention to pay you compliments⁠—To entertain agreeable notions of one’s own character is a great incentive to act with propriety and spirit. But I should be sorry to contribute in any degree to your acquiring an excess of self-sufficiency⁠ ⁠… I own indeed that when⁠ ⁠… to display my extensive erudition, I have quoted Greek, Latin and French sentences one after another with astonishing celerity; or have got into my <i>Old-hock humour</i> and fallen a-raving about princes and lords, knights and geniuses, ladies of quality and harpsichords; you, with a peculiar comic smile, have gently reminded me of the <i>importance of a man to himself</i>, and slily left the room with the witty Dean lying open at⁠—P.P. <i>clerk of this parish</i>. [Swift’s <i>Works</i>, ed. 1803, xxiii. 142.] I, Sir, who enjoy the pleasure of your intimate acquaintance, know that many of your hours of retirement are devoted to thought.’ The <i>Ode</i> is serious. He describes himself as having</p>
		<p>‘A soul by nature formed to feel Grief sharper than the tyrant’s steel, And bosom big with swelling thought From ancient lore’s remembrance brought.’</p>
		<p>In the winter of 1761⁠–⁠2 he had helped as a contributor and part-editor in bringing out a <i>Collection of Original Poems</i>. (<i>Boswell and Erskine’s Letters</i>, p. 27.) His next publication, also anonymous, was <i>The Club at Newmarket</i>, written, as the Preface says, ‘in the Newmarket Coffee Room, in which the author, being elected a member of the Jockey Club, had the happiness of passing several sprightly good-humoured evenings.’ It is very poor stuff. In the winter of 1762⁠–⁠3 he joined in writing the <i>Critical Strictures</i>, mentioned <i>post</i>, June 25, 1763. Just about the time that he first met Johnson he and his friend the Hon. Andrew Erskine had published in their own names a very impudent little volume of the correspondence that had passed between them. Of this I published an edition with notes in 1879, together with Boswell’s <i>Journal of a Tour to Corsica</i>. (Messrs. Thos. De La Rue &amp; Co.).</p>
		<p>[1135] Boswell, in 1768, in the preface to the third edition of his <i>Corsica</i> described ‘the warmth of affection and the dignity of veneration’ with which he never ceased to think of Mr. Johnson.</p>
		<p>[1136] In the <i>Garrick Carres</i>, (ii. 83) there is a confused letter from this unfortunate man, asking Garrick for the loan of five guineas. He had a scheme for delivering dramatic lectures at Eton and Oxford; ‘but,’ he added, ‘my externals have so unfavourable an appearance that I cannot produce myself with any comfort or hope of success.’ Garrick sent him five guineas. He had been a Major in the army, an actor, and dramatic author. ‘For the last seven years of his life he struggled under sickness and want to a degree of uncommon misery.’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for 1784, p. 959.</p>
		<p>[1137] As great men of antiquity such as Scipio <i>Africanus</i> had an epithet added to their names, in consequence of some celebrated action, so my illustrious friend was often called <i>DICTIONARY JOHNSON</i>, from that wonderful atchievement of genius and labour, his <i>Dictionary of the English Language</i>; the merit of which I contemplate with more and more admiration. BOSWELL. In like manner we have ‘Hermes Harris,’ ‘Pliny Melmoth,’ ‘Demosthenes Taylor,’ ‘Persian Jones,’ ‘Abyssinian Bruce,’ ‘Microscope Baker,’ ‘Leonidas Glover,’ ‘Hesiod Cooke,’ and ‘Corsica Boswell.’</p>
		<p>[1138] See <i>ante</i>, p. 124. He introduced Boswell to Davies, who was ‘the immediate introducer.’ <i>Post</i>, under June 18, 1783, note.</p>
		<p>[1139] On March 2, 1754 (not 1753), the audience called for a repetition of some lines which they applied against the government. ‘Diggs, the actor, refused by order of Sheridan, the manager, to repeat them; Sheridan would not even appear on the stage to justify the prohibition. In an instant the audience demolished the inside of the house, and reduced it to a shell.’ Walpole’s <i>Reign of George II</i>, i. 389, and <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxiv. 141. Sheridan’s friend, Mr. S. Whyte, says (_Miscellanea Nova, p. 16):⁠—‘In the year 1762 Sheridan’s scheme for an <i>English Dictionary</i> was published. That memorable year he was nominated for a pension.’ He quotes (p. 111) a letter from Mrs. Sheridan, dated Nov. 29, 1762, in which she says:⁠—‘I suppose you must have heard that the King has granted him a pension of 200£. a year, merely as an encouragement to his undertaking.’</p>
		<p>[1140] See <i>post</i>, March 28, 1776.</p>
		<p>[1141] Horace Walpole describes Lord Bute as ‘a man that had passed his life in solitude, and was too haughty to admit to his familiarity but half a dozen silly authors and flatterers. Sir Henry Erskine, a military poet, Home, a tragedy-writing parson,’ <abbr>etc.</abbr> <i>Mem. of the Reign of George III</i>, i. 37.</p>
		<p>[1142] See <i>post</i>, March 28, 1776.</p>
		<p>[1143] ‘Native wood-<i>notes</i> wild.’ Milton’s <i>L’Allegro</i>, l. 134</p>
		<p>[1144]</p>
		<p>‘In nova fert animus mutatas dicere formas<br/>
		Corpora. Di coeptis (nam vos mutastis et illas)<br/>
		Adspirate meis.’<br/>
		‘Of bodies changed to various forms I sing:⁠—<br/>
		Ye Gods from whence these miracles did spring<br/>
		Inspired, <abbr>etc.</abbr>’⁠—DRYDEN, Ov. <i>Met</i>. i.i.<br/></p>
		<p>See <i>post</i> under March 30, 1783, for Lord Loughborough.</p>
		<p>[1145] See <i>post</i>, May 17, 1783, and June 24, 1784. Sheridan was not of a forgiving nature. For some years he would not speak to his famous son: yet he went with his daughters to the theatre to see one of his pieces performed. ‘The son took up his station by one of the side scenes, opposite to the box where they sat, and there continued, unobserved, to look at them during the greater part of the night. On his return home he burst into tears, and owned how deeply it had gone to his heart, “to think that <i>there</i> sat his father and his sisters before him, and yet that he alone was not permitted to go near them.” ’ Moore’s <i>Sheridan</i>, i. 167.</p>
		<p>[1146] As Johnson himself said:⁠—‘Men hate more steadily than they love; and if I have said something to hurt a man once, I shall not get the better of this by saying many things to please him.’ <i>Post</i>, Sept. 15, 1777.</p>
		<p>[1147] P. 447. BOSWELL. ‘There is another writer, at present of gigantic fame in these days of little men, who has pretended to scratch out a life of Swift, but so miserably executed as only to reflect back on himself that disgrace which he meant to throw upon the character of the Dean.’ <i>The Life of Doctor Swift</i>, Swift’s <i>Works</i>, ed. 1803, ii. 200. There is a passage in the <i>Lives of the Poets</i> (<i>Works</i>, viii. 43) in which Johnson might be supposed playfully to have anticipated this attack. He is giving an account of Blackmore’s imaginary <i>Literary Club of Lay Monks</i>, of which the hero was ‘one Mr. Johnson.’ ‘The rest of the <i>Lay Monks</i>,’ he writes, ‘seem to be but feeble mortals, in comparison with the gigantick Johnson.’ See also <i>post</i>, Oct. 16, 1769. Horace Walpole (<i>Letters</i>, v. 458) spoke no less scornfully than Sheridan of Johnson and his contemporaries. On April 27, 1773, after saying that he should like to be intimate with Anstey (the author of the <i>New Bath Guide</i>), or with the author of the <i>Heroic Epistle</i>, he continues:⁠—‘I have no thirst to know the rest of my contemporaries, from the absurd bombast of Dr. Johnson down to the silly Dr. Goldsmith; though the latter changeling has had bright gleams of parts, and the former had sense, till he changed it for words, and sold it for a pension. Don’t think me scornful. Recollect that I have seen Pope and lived with Gray.’</p>
		<p>[1148] Johnson is thus mentioned by Mrs. Sheridan in a letter dated, Blois, Nov. 16, 1743, according to the <i>Garrick Corres</i>, i. 17, but the date is wrongly given, as the Sheridans went to Blois in 1764: ‘I have heard Johnson decry some of the prettiest pieces of writing we have in English; yet Johnson is an honourable man⁠—that is to say, he is a good critic, and in other respects a man of enormous talents.’</p>
		<p>[1149] My position has been very well illustrated by Mr. Belsham of Bedford, in his <i>Essay on Dramatic Poetry</i>. ‘The fashionable doctrine (says he) both of moralists and criticks in these times is, that virtue and happiness are constant concomitants; and it is regarded as a kind of dramatick impiety to maintain that virtue should not be rewarded, nor vice punished in the last scene of the last act of every tragedy. This conduct in our modern poets is, however, in my opinion, extremely injudicious; for, it labours in vain to inculcate a doctrine in theory, which every one knows to be false in fact, <i>viz</i>. that virtue in real life is always productive of happiness; and vice of misery. Thus Congreve concludes the Tragedy of <i>The Mourning Bride</i> with the following foolish couplet:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘For blessings ever wait on virtuous deeds,<br/>
		And though a late, a sure reward succeeds.’<br/></p>
		<p>‘When a man eminently virtuous, a Brutus, a Cato, or a Socrates, finally sink under the pressure of accumulated misfortune, we are not only led to entertain a more indignant hatred of vice than if he rose from his distress, but we are inevitably induced to cherish the sublime idea that a day of future retribution will arrive when he shall receive not merely poetical, but real and substantial justice.’ <i>Essays Philosophical, Historical, and Literary</i>, London, 1791, vol. II. 8vo. p. 317.</p>
		<p>This is well reasoned and well expressed. I wish, indeed, that the ingenious authour had not thought it necessary to introduce any <i>instance</i> of ‘a man eminently virtuous;’ as he would then have avoided mentioning such a ruffian as Brutus under that description. Mr. Belsham discovers in his <i>Essays</i> so much reading and thinking, and good composition, that I regret his not having been fortunate enough to be educated a member of our excellent national establishment. Had he not been nursed in nonconformity, he probably would not have been tainted with those heresies (as I sincerely, and on no slight investigation, think them) both in religion and politicks, which, while I read, I am sure, with candour, I cannot read without offence. BOSWELL. Boswell’s ‘position has been illustrated’ with far greater force by Johnson. ‘It has been the boast of some swelling moralists, that every man’s fortune was in his own power, that prudence supplied the place of all other divinities, and that happiness is the unfailing consequence of virtue. But surely the quiver of Omnipotence is stored with arrows against which the shield of human virtue, however adamantine it has been boasted, is held up in vain; we do not always suffer by our crimes; we are not always protected by our innocence.’ <i>The Adventurer</i>, No. 120. See also <i>Rasselas</i>, chap. 27.</p>
		<p>[1150] ‘Charles Fox said that Mrs. Sheridan’s <i>Sydney Biddulph</i> was the best of all modern novels. By the by [R. B.] Sheridan used to declare that <i>he</i> had never read it.’ Rogers’s <i>Table-Talk</i>, p. 90. The editor says, in a note on this passage:⁠—‘The incident in <i>The School for Scandal</i> of Sir Oliver’s presenting himself to his relations in disguise is manifestly taken by Sheridan from his mother’s novel.’</p>
		<p>[1151] No. 8.⁠—The very place where I was fortunate enough to be introduced to the illustrious subject of this work, deserves to be particularly marked. I never pass by it without feeling reverence and regret. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1152] Johnson said:⁠—‘Sir, Davies has learning enough to give credit to a clergyman.’ <i>Post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton’s <i>Collection</i>. The spiteful Steevens thus wrote about Davies:⁠—‘His concern ought to be with the outside of books; but Dr. Johnson, Dr. Percy, and some others have made such a coxcomb of him, that he is now hardy enough to open volumes, turn over their leaves, and give his opinions of their contents. Did I ever tell you an anecdote of him? About ten years ago I wanted the Oxford <i>Homer</i>, and called at Davies’s to ask for it, as I had seen one thrown about his shop. Will you believe me, when I assure you he told me “he had but one, and that he kept for <i>his own reading</i>?” ’ <i>Garrick Corres</i>. i. 608.</p>
		<p>[1153] Johnson, writing to Beattie, <i>post</i>, Aug 21, 1780, says:⁠—‘Mr. Davies has got great success as an author, generated by the corruption of a bookseller.’ His principal works are <i>Memoirs of Garrick</i>, 1780, and <i>Dramatic Miscellanies</i>, 1784.</p>
		<p>[1154] Churchill, in the <i>Rosciad</i>, thus celebrated his wife and mocked his recitation:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘With him came mighty Davies. On my life<br/>
		That Davies hath a very pretty wife:⁠—<br/>
		Statesman all over!⁠—In plots famous grown!⁠—<br/>
		He mouths a sentence, as curs mouth a bone.’<br/></p>
		<p>Churchill’s <i>Poems</i>, i. 16.</p>
		<p>See <i>post</i>, under April 20, 1764, and March 20, 1778. Charles Lamb in a note to his <i>Essay on the Tragedies of Shakespeare</i> says of Davies, that he ‘is recorded to have recited the <i>Paradise Lost</i> better than any man in England in his day (though I cannot help thinking there must be some mistake in this tradition).’ Lamb’s <i>Works</i>, ed. 1840, p. 517.</p>
		<p>[1155] See Johnson’s letter to Davies, <i>post</i>, June 18, 1783.</p>
		<p>[1156] Mr. Murphy, in his <i>Essay on the Life and Genius of Dr. Johnson</i>, [p. 106], has given an account of this meeting considerably different from mine, I am persuaded without any consciousness of errour. His memory, at the end of near thirty years, has undoubtedly deceived him, and he supposes himself to have been present at a scene, which he has probably heard inaccurately described by others. In my note <i>taken on the very day</i>, in which I am confident I marked every thing material that passed, no mention is made of this gentleman; and I am sure, that I should not have omitted one so well known in the literary world. It may easily be imagined that this, my first interview with Dr. Johnson, with all its circumstances, made a strong impression on my mind, and would be registered with peculiar attention. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1157] See <i>post</i>, April 8, 1775.</p>
		<p>[1158] That this was a momentary sally against Garrick there can be no doubt; for at Johnson’s desire he had, some years before, given a benefit-night at his theatre to this very person, by which she had got two hundred pounds. Johnson, indeed, upon all other occasions, when I was in his company, praised the very liberal charity of Garrick. I once mentioned to him, ‘It is observed, Sir, that you attack Garrick yourself, but will suffer nobody else to do it.’ JOHNSON, (smiling) ‘Why, Sir, that is true.’ BOSWELL. See <i>post</i>, May 15, 1776, and April 17, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1159] By Henry Home, Lord Kames, 3 vols. Edinburgh, 1762. See <i>post</i>, Oct. 16, 1769. ‘Johnson laughed much at Lord Kames’s opinion that war was a good thing occasionally, as so much valour and virtue were exhibited in it. “A fire,” says Johnson, “might as well be thought a good thing; there is the bravery and address of the firemen employed in extinguishing it; there is much humanity exerted in saving the lives and properties of the poor sufferers; yet after all this, who can say a fire is a good thing?” ’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, (1787) xi. 209.</p>
		<p>[1160] No. 45 of the <i>North Briton</i> had been published on April 23. Wilkes was arrested under a general warrant on April 30. On May 6 he was discharged from custody by the Court of Common Pleas, before which he had been brought by a writ of <i>Habeas Corpus</i>. A few days later he was served with a subpoena upon an information exhibited against him by the Attorney-General in the Court of King’s Bench. He did not enter an appearance, holding, as he said, the serving him with the subpoena as a violation of the privilege of parliament. <i>Parl. Hist</i>. xv. 1360.</p>
		<p>[1161] Mr. Sheridan was then reading lectures upon Oratory at Bath, where Derrick was Master of the Ceremonies; or, as the phrase is, KING. BOSWELL. Dr. Parr, who knew Sheridan well, describes him ‘as a wrong-headed, whimsical man.’ ‘I remember,’ he continues, ‘hearing one of his daughters, in the house where I lodged, triumphantly repeat Dryden’s <i>Ode upon St. Cecilia’s Day</i>, according to the instruction given to her by her father. Take a sample:⁠—</p>
		<p>“<i>None</i> but the brave None but the <i>brave</i>. None <i>but</i> the brave deserve the fair.”</p>
		<p>Naughty Richard [R. B. Sheridan], like Gallio, seemed to care nought for these things.’ Moore’s <i>Sheridan</i>, i. 9, 11. Sheridan writing from Dublin on Dec. 7, 1771, says:⁠—‘Never was party violence carried to such a height as in this session; the House [the Irish House of Parliament] seldom breaking up till eleven or twelve at night. From these contests the desire of improving in the article of elocution is become very general. There are no less than five persons of rank and fortune now waiting my leisure to become my pupils.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 60. See <i>post</i>, July 28, 1763.</p>
		<p>[1162] Bonnell Thornton. See <i>post</i> July 1, 1763.</p>
		<p>[1163] Lloyd was one of a remarkable group of Westminster boys. He was a school-fellow not only of Churchill, the elder Colman, and Cumberland, buy also of Cowper and Warren Hastings. Bonnell Thornton was a few years their senior. Not many weeks after this meeting with Boswell, Lloyd was in the Fleet prison. Churchill in <i>Indepence</i>(<i>Poems</i> ii 310) thus addresses the Patrons of the age:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Hence, ye vain boasters, to the Fleet repair<br/>
		And ask, with blushes ask if Lloyd is there.’<br/></p>
		<p>Of the four men who thus enlivened Boswell, two were dead before the end of the following year. Churchill went first. When Lloyd heard of his death, ‘ “I shall follow poor Charles,” was all he said, as he went to the bed from which he never rose again.’ Thornton lived three or four years longer, Forster’s <i>Essays</i>, ii 217, 270, 289. See also his <i>Life of Goldsmith</i> i. 264, for an account how ‘Lloyd invited Goldsmith to sup with some friends of Grub Street, and left him to pay the reckoning.’ Thornton, Lloyd, Colman, Cowper, and Joseph Hill, to whom Cowper’s famous <i>Epistle</i> was addressed, had at one time been members of the Nonsense Club. Southey’s <i>Cowper</i>, i. 37.</p>
		<p>[1164] The author of the well-known sermons, see <i>post</i>, under Dec. 21, 1776.</p>
		<p>[1165] See <i>post</i>, under Dec. 9, 1784.</p>
		<p>[1166] See <i>post</i>, Feb. 7, 1775, under Dec. 24, 1783, and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Nov. 10, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1167] ‘Sir,’ he said to Reynolds, ‘a man might write such stuff for ever, if he would <i>abandon</i> his mind to it;’ <i>post</i>, under March 30, 1783.</p>
		<p>[1168] ‘Or behind the screen’ some one might have added, <i>ante</i>, i. 163.</p>
		<p>[1169] Wesley was told that a whole waggon-load of Methodists had been lately brought before a Justice of the Peace. When he asked what they were charged with, one replied, ‘Why they pretended to be better than other people, and besides they prayed from morning to night.’ Wesley’s <i>Journal</i>, i. 361. See also <i>post</i>, 1780, near the end of Mr. Langton’s <i>Collection</i>.</p>
		<p>[1170] ‘The progress which the understanding makes through a book has’ he said, ‘more pain than pleasure in it;’ <i>post</i>, May 1, 1783.</p>
		<p>[1171] <i>Matthew</i>, vi. 16.</p>
		<p>[1172] Boswell, it is clear, in the early days of his acquaintance with Johnson often led the talk to this subject. See <i>post</i>, June 25, July 14, 21, and 28, 1763.</p>
		<p>[1173] See <i>post</i>, April 7, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1174] He finished his day, ‘however late it might be,’ by taking tea at Miss Williams’s lodgings; <i>post</i>, July 1, 1763.</p>
		<p>[1175] See <i>post</i>, under Feb. 15, 1766, Feb. 1767, March 20, 1776, and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 20, 1773, where Johnson says:⁠—‘I have been trying to cure my laziness all my life, and could not do it.’ It was this kind of life that caused so much of the remorse which is seen in his <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>.</p>
		<p>[1176] Horace Walpole writing on June 12, 1759 (<i>Letters</i>, iii. 231), says:⁠—‘A war that reaches from Muscovy to Alsace, and from Madras to California, don’t produce an article half so long as Mr. Johnson’s riding three horses at once.’ I have a curious copper-plate showing Johnson standing on one, or two, and leading a third horse in full speed.’ It bears the date of November 1758. See <i>post</i>, April 3, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1177] In the impudent <i>Correspondence</i> (pp. 63, 65) which Boswell and Andrew Erskine published this year, Boswell shows why he wished to enter the Guards. ‘My fondness for the Guards,’ he writes, ‘must appear very strange to you, who have a rooted antipathy at the glare of scarlet. But I must inform you, that there is a city called London, for which I have as violent an affection as the most romantic lover ever had for his mistress.⁠ ⁠… I am thinking of the brilliant scenes of happiness, which I shall enjoy as an officer of the guards. How I shall be acquainted with all the grandeur of a court, and all the elegance of dress and diversions; become a favourite of ministers of state, and the adoration of ladies of quality, beauty, and fortune! How many parties of pleasure shall I have in town! How many fine jaunts to the noble seats of dukes, lords, and members of parliament in the country! I am thinking of the perfect knowledge which I shall acquire of men and manners, of the intimacies which I shall have the honour to form with the learned and ingenious in every science, and of the many amusing literary anecdotes which I shall pick up,’ etc. Boswell, in his <i>Hebrides</i> (Aug. 18, 1773), says of himself:⁠—‘His inclination was to be a soldier; but his father, a respectable Judge, had pressed him into the profession of the law.’</p>
		<p>[1178] A row of tenements in the Strand, between Wych Street and Temple Bar, and ‘so called from the butchers’ shambles on the south side.’ (<i>Strype</i>, B. iv. p. 118.) Butcher Row was pulled down in 1813, and the present Pickett Street erected in its stead. P. CUNNINGHAM. In <i>Humphry Clinker</i>, in the letter of June 10, one of the poor authors is described as having been ‘reduced to a woollen night-cap and living upon sheep’s-trotters, up three pair of stairs backward in Butcher Row.’</p>
		<p>[1179] Cibber was poet-laureate from 1730 to 1757. Horace Walpole describes him as ‘that good humoured and honest veteran, so unworthily aspersed by Pope, whose <i>Memoirs</i>, with one or two of his comedies, will secure his fame, in spite of all the abuse of his contemporaries.’ His successor Whitehead, Walpole calls ‘a man of a placid genius.’ <i>Reign of George II</i>, iii. 81. See <i>ante</i>, pp. 149, 185, and <i>post</i>, Oct. 19, 1769, May 15, 1776, and Sept. 21, 1777.</p>
		<p>[1180] The following quotations show the difference of style in the two poets:⁠—</p>
		<h5>COLLEY GIBBER.</h5>
		<p>‘When her pride, fierce in arms,<br/>
		 Would to Europe give law;<br/>
		 At her cost let her come,<br/>
		 To our cheer of huzza!<br/>
		 Not lightning with thunder more terrible darts,<br/>
		 Than the burst of huzza from our bold <i>British</i> hearts.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxv. 515.</p>
		<h5>WM. WHITEHEAD.</h5>
		<p>‘Ye guardian powers, to whose command,<br/>
		 At Nature’s birth, th’ Almighty mind<br/>
		 The delegated task assign’d<br/>
		 To watch o’er Albion’s favour’d land,<br/>
		 What time your hosts with choral lay,<br/>
		 Emerging from its kindred deep,<br/>
		 Applausive hail’d each verdant steep,<br/>
		 And white rock, glitt’ring to the new-born day!’<br/></p>
		<p><i>Ib</i>. xxix. 32.</p>
		<p>[1181] See <i>ante</i>, p. 167.</p>
		<p>[1182] ‘Whitehead was for some while Garrick’s “reader” of new plays for Drury-lane.’ Forster’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 41. See <i>post</i>, April 25, 1778, note. The verses to Garrick are given in Chalmers’s <i>English Poets</i>, xvii. 222.</p>
		<p>[1183] ‘In 1757 Gray published <i>The Progress of Poetry</i> and <i>The Bard</i>, two compositions at which the readers of poetry were at first content to gaze in mute amazement. Some that tried them confessed their inability to understand them.⁠ ⁠… Garrick wrote a few lines in their praise. Some hardy champions undertook to rescue them from neglect; and in a short time many were content to be shown beauties which they could not see.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 478. See <i>post</i>, March 28, and April 2, 1775, and 1780 in Mr. Langton’s <i>Collection</i>. Goldsmith, no doubt, attacked Gray among ‘the misguided innovators,’ of whom he said in his <i>Life of Parnell</i>:⁠—‘They have adopted a language of their own, and call upon mankind for admiration. All those who do not understand them are silent, and those who make out their meaning are willing to praise to show they understand.’ Goldsmith’s <i>Misc. Works</i>, iv. 22.</p>
		<p>[1184] Johnson, perhaps, refers to the anonymous critic quoted by Mason in his notes on this Ode, who says:⁠—‘This abrupt execration plunges the reader into that sudden fearful perplexity which is designed to predominate through the whole.’ Mason’s <i>Gray</i>, ed. 1807, i. 96.</p>
		<p>[1185] ‘Of the first stanza [of <i>The Bard</i>] the abrupt beginning has been celebrated; but technical beauties can give praise only to the inventor. It is in the power of any man to rush abruptly upon his subject that has read the ballad of <i>Johnny Armstrong</i>.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 485.</p>
		<p>[1186] My friend Mr. Malone, in his valuable comments on Shakspeare, has traced in that great poet the <i>disjecta membra</i> of these lines. BOSWELL. Gray, in the edition of <i>The Bard</i> of the year 1768, in a note on these lines had quoted from <i>King John</i>, act v. sc. 1:⁠—‘Mocking the air with colours idly spread.’ Gosse’s <i>Gray</i>, i. 41. But Malone quotes also from <i>Macbeth</i>, act i. sc. 2:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky<br/>
		And fan our people cold.’<br/></p>
		<p>‘Out of these passages,’ he said, ‘Mr. Gray seems to have framed the first stanza of his celebrated <i>Ode</i>.’ Malone’s <i>Shakespeare</i>, xv. 344.</p>
		<p>[1187] Cradock records (<i>Memoirs</i>, 1.230) that Goldsmith said to him:⁠—‘You are so attached to Kurd, Gray, and Mason, that you think nothing good can proceed but out of that formal school;⁠—now, I’ll mend Gray’s <i>Elegy</i> by leaving out an idle word in every line.</p>
		<p>“The curfew tolls the knell of day,<br/>
		The lowing herd winds o’er the lea<br/>
		The ploughman homeward plods his way<br/>
		And⁠—“<br/></p>
		<p>Enough, enough, I have no ear for more.’</p>
		<p>[1188] So, less than two years later, Boswell opened his mind to Paoli. ‘My time passed here in the most agreeable manner. I enjoyed a sort of luxury of noble sentiment. Paoli became more affable with me. I made myself known to him.’ Boswell’s <i>Corsica</i>, p. 167.</p>
		<p>[1189] See <i>ante</i>, p. 67.</p>
		<p>[1190] See <i>post</i>, Sept. 22, 1777.</p>
		<p>[1191] See <i>post</i>, March 30, 1778, where in speaking of the appearance of spirits after death he says:⁠—‘All argument is against it; but all belief is for it.’ See also <i>ante</i>, p. 343, and <i>post</i>, April 15, 1778, under May 4, 1779, April 15, 1781, and June 12, 1784.</p>
		<p>[1192] The caricature begins:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Pomposo, insolent and loud<br/>
		Vain idol of a <i>scribbling</i> crowd,<br/>
		Whose very name inspires an awe<br/>
		Whose ev’ry word is Sense and Law.’<br/></p>
		<p>Churchill’s <i>Poems</i>, i. 216.</p>
		<p>[1193] The chief impostor, a man of the name of Parsons, had, it should seem, set his daughter to play the part of the ghost in order to pay out a grudge against a man who had sued him for a debt. The ghost was made to accuse this man of poisoning his sister-in-law, and to declare that she should only be at ease in her mind if he were hanged. ‘When Parsons stood on the Pillory at the end of Cock Lane, instead of being pelted, he had money given him.’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxxii. 43, 82, and xxxiii. 144.</p>
		<p>[1194] Horace Walpole, writing on Feb. 2, 1762 (<i>Letters</i>, iii. 481), says:⁠—‘I could send you volumes on the Ghost, and I believe, if I were to stay a little, I might send its <i>life</i>, dedicated to my Lord Dartmouth, by the Ordinary of Newgate, its two great patrons. A drunken parish clerk set it on foot out of revenge, the Methodists have adopted it, and the whole town of London think of nothing else.⁠ ⁠… I went to hear it, for it is not an <i>apparition</i>, but an <i>audition</i>,⁠ ⁠… the Duke of York, Lady Northumberland, Lady Mary Coke, Lord Hertford, and I, all in one Hackney-coach: it rained torrents; yet the lane was full of mob, and the house so full we could not get in.’ See <i>post</i>, April 10, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1195] Described by Goldsmith in <i>Retaliation</i> as ‘The scourge of impostors, the terror of quacks.’ See <i>ante</i>, p. 229.</p>
		<p>[1196] The account was as follows:⁠—‘On the night of the 1st of February [1762] many gentlemen eminent for their rank and character were, by the invitation of the Reverend Mr. Aldrich, of Clerkenwell, assembled at his house, for the examination of the noises supposed to be made by a departed spirit, for the detection of some enormous crime.</p>
		<p>‘About ten at night the gentlemen met in the chamber in which the girl, supposed to be disturbed by a spirit, had, with proper caution, been put to bed by several ladies. They sat rather more than an hour, and hearing nothing, went down stairs, when they interrogated the father of the girl, who denied, in the strongest terms, any knowledge or belief of fraud.</p>
		<p>‘The supposed spirit had before publickly promised, by an affirmative knock, that it would attend one of the gentlemen into the vault under the Church of St. John, Clerkenwell, where the body is deposited, and give a token of her presence there, by a knock upon her coffin; it was therefore determined to make this trial of the existence or veracity of the supposed spirit.</p>
		<p>‘While they were enquiring and deliberating, they were summoned into the girl’s chamber by some ladies who were near her bed, and who had heard knocks and scratches. When the gentlemen entered, the girl declared that she felt the spirit like a mouse upon her back, and was required to hold her hands out of bed. From that time, though the spirit was very solemnly required to manifest its existence by appearance, by impression on the hand or body of any present, by scratches, knocks, or any other agency, no evidence of any preter-natural power was exhibited.</p>
		<p>‘The spirit was then very seriously advertised that the person to whom the promise was made of striking the coffin, was then about to visit the vault, and that the performance of the promise was then claimed. The company at one o’clock went into the church, and the gentleman to whom the promise was made, went with another into the vault. The spirit was solemnly required to perform its promise, but nothing more than silence ensued: the person supposed to be accused by the spirit, then went down with several others, but no effect was perceived. Upon their return they examined the girl, but could draw no confession from her. Between two and three she desired and was permitted to go home with her father.</p>
		<p>‘It is, therefore, the opinion of the whole assembly, that the child has some art of making or counterfeiting a particular noise, and that there is no agency of any higher cause.’ BOSWELL. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxxii. 81. The following MS. letter is in the British Museum:⁠—</p>
		<h5>‘REVD. SIR,</h5>
		<p>The appointment for the examination stands as it did when I saw you last, viz., between 8 and 9 this evening. Mr. Johnson was applied to by a friend of mine soon after you left him, and promised to be with us. Should be glad, if convenient, you’d show him the way hither. Mrs. Oakes, of Dr. Macauley’s recommendation, I should be glad to have here on the occasion; and think it would do honour to the list of examiners to have Dr. Macauley with us.</p>
		<p>I am, Dear Sir, your most obedient servant, STE. ALDRICH.</p>
		<p>If Dr. Macauley can conveniently attend, should be glad you’d acquaint Lord Dartmouth with it, who seemed to be at loss to recommend a gentleman of the faculty at his end of the town.</p>
		<p>St. John’s Square. Monday noon.</p>
		<p>To the Revd. Dr. Douglas.’</p>
		<p>Endorsed ‘Mr. Aldrich, Feb. 1762, about the Cock Lane ghost.⁠—Examination at his house.’</p>
		<p>[1197] Boswell was with Paoli when news came that a Corsican under sentence of death ‘had consented to accept of his life, upon condition of becoming hangman. This made a great noise among the Corsicans, who were enraged at the creature, and said their nation was now disgraced. Paoli did not think so. He said to me:⁠—“I am glad of this. It will be of service. It will contribute to form us to a just subordination. As we must have Corsican tailours, and Corsican shoemakers, we must also have a Corsican hangman.” ’ Boswell’s <i>Corsica</i>, p. 201. See <i>post</i>, July 20 and 21, 1763, April 13, 1773, and March 28, 1775.</p>
		<p>[1198] ‘Mallet’s Dramas had their day, a short day, and are forgotten.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 468.</p>
		<p>[1199] See <i>ante</i>, p. 384, note.</p>
		<p>[1200] ‘A man had heard that Dempster was very clever, and therefore expected that he could say nothing but good things. Being brought acquainted, Mr. Dempster said to him with much politeness, “I hope, Sir, your lady and family are well.” “Ay, ay, man,” said he, “pray where is the great wit in that speech?” ’ <i>Boswelliana</i>, p. 307. Mr. Dempster is mentioned by Burns in <i>The Author’s Earnest Cry and Prayer to the Scotch Representatives in the House of Commons</i>:⁠—‘Dempster, a true-blue Scot I’se warran.’ In 1769 he was elected member for the Forfar Boroughs. <i>Parl. Hist</i>. xvi. 453.</p>
		<p>[1201] <i>The Critical Review</i>, in which Mallet himself sometimes wrote, characterised this pamphlet as ‘the crude efforts of envy, petulance and self conceit.’ There being thus three epithets, we, the three authours, had a humourous contention how each should be appropriated. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1202] Johnson (<i>Works</i>, ix. 86) talks of the chiefs ‘gradually degenerating from patriarchal rulers to rapacious landlords.’ In Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, the subject is often examined.</p>
		<p>[1203] See <i>ante</i>, i. 365.</p>
		<p>[1204] ‘Dr. Burney spoke with great warmth of affection of Dr. Johnson; said he was the kindest creature in the world when he thought he was loved and respected by others. He would play the fool among friends, but he required deference. It was necessary to ask questions and make no assertion. If you said two and two make four, he would say, “How will you prove that, Sir?” Dr. Burney seemed amiably sensitive to every unfavourable remark on his old friend.’ H. C. Robinson’s <i>Diary</i>, iii. 485.</p>
		<p>[1205] See <i>post</i>, April 24, 1777, note, and Oct. l0, 1779, where he consults Johnson about the study of Greek. He formed wishes, scarcely plans of study but never studied.</p>
		<p>[1206] See <i>post</i>, Feb. 18, 1777. It was Graham who so insulted Goldsmith by saying:⁠—“ ’Tis not you I mean, Dr. <i>Minor</i>; ‘ ’tis Dr. <i>Major</i> there.’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 24, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1207] See <i>post</i>, Sept. 19, 1777.</p>
		<p>[1208] Of Mathematics Goldsmith wrote:⁠—‘This seems a science to which the meanest intellects are equal.’ See <i>post</i>, March 15, 1776, note.</p>
		<p>[1209] In his <i>Present State of Polite Learning</i>, ch. 13 (<i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 266), Goldsmith writes:⁠—‘A man who is whirled through Europe in a post-chaise, and the pilgrim who walks the grand tour on foot, will form very different conclusions. <i>Haud inexpertus loquor</i>.’ The last three words are omitted in the second edition.</p>
		<p>[1210] George Primrose in the <i>Vicar of Wakefield</i> (ch. 20), after describing these disputations, says:⁠—‘In this manner I fought my way towards England.’</p>
		<p>[1211] Dr. Warton wrote to his brother on Jan. 22, 1766:⁠—‘Of all solemn coxcombs Goldsmith is the first; yet sensible⁠—but affects to use Johnson’s hard words in conversation.’ Wooll’s <i>Warton</i>, p. 312.</p>
		<p>[1212] It was long believed that the author of one of Goldsmith’s early works was Lord Lyttelton. ‘ “Whenever I write anything,” said Goldsmith, “I think the public <i>make a point</i> to know nothing about it.” So the present book was issued as a <i>History of England in a series of Letters from a Nobleman to his Son</i>. The persuasion at last became general that the author was Lord Lyttelton, and the name of that grave good lord is occasionally still seen affixed to it on the bookstalls.’ Forster’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 301. The <i>Traveller</i> was the first of his works to which he put his name. It was published in 1764. 16. p. 364.</p>
		<p>[1213] Published in 1759.</p>
		<p>[1214] Published in 1760⁠–⁠1.</p>
		<p>[1215] See his Epitaph in Westminster Abbey, written by Dr. Johnson. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>‘Qui nullum fere scribendi genus<br/>
		Non tetigit,<br/>
		Nullum quod tetigit non ornavit.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>Post</i>, under June 22, 1776.</p>
		<p>[1216] In allusion to this, Mr. Horace Walpole, who admired his writings, said he was ‘an inspired ideot;’ and Garrick described him as one</p>
		<p>‘⁠⸺⁠for shortness call’d Noll, Who wrote like an angel, and talk’d like poor Poll.’</p>
		<p>Sir Joshua Reynolds mentioned to me that he frequently heard Goldsmith talk warmly of the pleasure of being liked, and observe how hard it would be if literary excellence should preclude a man from that satisfaction, which he perceived it often did, from the envy which attended it; and therefore Sir Joshua was convinced that he was intentionally more absurd, in order to lessen himself in social intercourse, trusting that his character would be sufficiently supported by his works. If it indeed was his intention to appear absurd in company, he was often very successful. But with due deference to Sir Joshua’s ingenuity, I think the conjecture too refined. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>Horace Walpole’s saying of the ‘inspired ideot’ is recorded in Davies’s <i>Garrick</i>, ii. 151. Walpole, in his <i>Letters</i>, describes Goldsmith as ‘a changeling that has had bright gleams of parts,’ (v. 458); ‘a fool, the more wearing for having some sense,’ (vi. 29); ‘a poor soul that had sometimes parts, though never common sense,’ (<i>ib</i>. p. 73); and ‘an idiot, with once or twice a fit of parts,’ (<i>ib</i>. p. 379). Garrick’s lines⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Here lies Nolly Goldsmith, for shortness called Noll,<br/>
		Who wrote like an angel, but talked like poor Poll,’<br/></p>
		<p>are his imaginary epitaph on Goldsmith, which, with the others, gave rise to <i>Retaliation</i>. Forster’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 405.</p>
		<p>[1217] Rousseau accounting for the habit he has ‘de balbutier promptement des paroles sans idées,’ continues, ‘je crois que voilà de quoi faire assez comprendre comment n’étant pas un sot, j’ai cependant souvent passé pour l’être, même chez des gens en état de bien juger.⁠ ⁠… Le parti que j’ai pris d’écrire et de me cacher est précisément celui qui me convenait. Moi présent on n’aurait jamais su ce que je valois, on ne l’aurait pas soupconné même.’ <i>Les Confessions</i>, Livre iii. See <i>post</i>, April 27, 1773, where Boswell admits that ‘Goldsmith was often very fortunate in his witty contests, even when he entered the lists with Johnson himself:’ and April 30, 1773, where Reynolds says of him: ‘There is no man whose company is more liked.’</p>
		<p>[1218] Northcote, a few weeks before his death, said to Mr. Prior:⁠—‘When Goldsmith entered a room, Sir, people who did not know him became for a moment silent from awe of his literary reputation; when he came out again, they were riding upon his back.’ Prior’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 440. According to Dr. Percy:⁠—‘His face was marked with strong lines of thinking. His first appearance was not captivating; but when he grew easy and cheerful in company, he relaxed into such a display of good humour as soon removed every unfavourable impression.’ Goldsmith’s <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 117.</p>
		<p>[1219] ‘Dr. Goldsmith told me, he himself envied Shakespeare.’ Walpole’s <i>Letters</i>, vi. 379. Boswell, later on (<i>post</i>, May 9, 1773), says:⁠—‘In my opinion Goldsmith had not more of it [an envious disposition] than other people have, but only talked of it freely.’ See also <i>post</i>, April 12, 1778. According to Northcote, ‘Sir Joshua said that Goldsmith considered public notoriety or fame as one great parcel, to the whole of which he laid claim, and whoever partook of any part of it, whether dancer, singer, slight of hand man, or tumbler, deprived him of his right.’ Northcote’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 248. See <i>post</i>, April 7, 1778, where Johnson said that ‘Goldsmith was not an agreeable companion, for he talked always for fame;’ and April 9, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1220] Miss Hornecks, one of whom is now married to Henry Bunbury, Esq., and the other to Colonel Gwyn. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1221] ‘Standing at the window of their hotel [in Lisle] to see a company of soldiers in the Square, the beauty of the sisters Horneck drew such marked admiration, that Goldsmith, heightening his drollery with that air of solemnity so generally a point in his humour and so often more solemnly misinterpreted, turned off from the window with the remark that elsewhere <i>he</i> too could have his admirers. The Jessamy Bride, Mrs. Gwyn, was asked about the occurrence not many years ago; remembered it as a playful jest; and said how shocked she had subsequently been “to see it adduced in print as a proof of his envious disposition.” ’ Forster’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 217.</p>
		<p>[1222] Puppets.</p>
		<p>[1223] He went home with Mr. Burke to supper; and broke his shin by attempting to exhibit to the company how much better he could jump over a stick than the puppets. BOSWELL. Mr. Hoole was one day in a coach with Johnson, when ‘Johnson, who delighted in rapidity of pace, and had been speaking of Goldsmith, put his head out of one of the windows to see they were going right, and rubbing his hands with an air of satisfaction exclaimed:⁠—“This man drives fast and well; were Goldsmith here now he would tell us he could do better.” ’ Prior’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, ii. 127.</p>
		<p>[1224] See <i>post</i>, April 9, 1773; also April 9, 1778, where Johnson says, ‘Goldsmith had no settled notions upon any subject.’</p>
		<p>[1225] I am willing to hope that there may have been some mistake as to this anecdote, though I had it from a Dignitary of the Church. Dr. Isaac Goldsmith, his near relation, was Dean of Cloyne, in 1747. BOSWELL. This note first appears in the second edition.</p>
		<p>[1226] Mr. Welsh, in <i>A Bookseller of the Last Century</i>, p. 58, quotes the following entry from an account-book of B. Collins of Salisbury, the printer of the first edition of the <i>Vicar</i>:⁠—’<i>Vicar of Wakefield</i>, 2 vols. 12mo., 1/3rd. B. Collins, Salisbury, bought of Dr. Goldsmith, the author, October 28, 1762, £21.’ Goldsmith, it should seem from this, as Collins’s third share was worth twenty guineas, was paid not sixty pounds, but sixty guineas. Collins shared in many of the ventures of Newbery, Goldsmith’s publisher. Mr. Welsh says (<i>ib</i>. p. 61) that Collins’s accounts show ‘that the first three editions resulted in a loss.’ If this was so, the booksellers must have been great bunglers, for the book ran through three editions in six or seven months. Forster’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 425.</p>
		<p>[1227] The Traveller (price one shilling and sixpence) was published in December 1764, and <i>The Vicar of Wakefield</i> in March 1766. In August 1765 the fourth edition of <i>The Traveller</i> appeared, and the ninth in the year Goldsmith died. He received for it £21. Forster’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 364, 374, 409. See <i>ante</i>, p. 193, note i.</p>
		<p>[1228] ‘ “Miss Burney,” said Mrs. Thrale [to Dr. Johnson], “is fond of <i>The Vicar of Wakefield</i>, and so am I. Don’t you like it, Sir?” “No, madam, it is very faulty; there is nothing of real life in it, and very little of nature. It is a mere fanciful performance.” ’ Mme. D’Arblay’s <i>Diary</i>, i. 83. ‘There are a hundred faults in this Thing,’ said Goldsmith in the preface, ‘and a hundred things might be said to prove them beauties. But it is needless. A book may be amusing with numerous errors, or it may be very dull without a single absurdity.’ See <i>post</i>, April 25, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1229] <i>Anecdotes of Johnson</i>, p. 119. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1230] <i>Life of Johnson</i>, p. 420. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1231] In his imprudence he was like Savage, of whom Johnson says (<i>Works</i>, viii. 161):⁠—‘To supply him with money was a hopeless attempt; for no sooner did he see himself master of a sum sufficient to set him free from care for a day, than he became profuse and luxurious.’ When Savage was ‘lodging in the liberties of the Fleet, his friends sent him every Monday a guinea, which he commonly spent before the next morning, and trusted, after his usual manner, the remaining part of the week to the bounty of fortune.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 170.</p>
		<p>[1232] It may not be improper to annex here Mrs. Piozzi’s account of this transaction, in her own words, as a specimen of the extreme inaccuracy with which all her anecdotes of Dr. Johnson are related, or rather discoloured and distorted:⁠—‘I have forgotten the year, but it could scarcely, I think, be later than 1765 or 1766 that he was <i>called abruptly from our house after dinner</i>, and returning <i>in about three hours</i>, said he had been with an enraged authour, whose landlady pressed him for payment within doors, while the bailiffs beset him without; that he was <i>drinking himself drunk</i> with Madeira, to drown care, and fretting over a novel, which, when <i>finished</i>, was to be his <i>whole fortune</i>, but <i>he could not get it done for distraction</i>, nor could he step out of doors to offer it for sale. Mr. Johnson, therefore, sent away the bottle, and went to the bookseller, recommending the performance, and <i>desiring some immediate relief</i>; which when he brought back to the writer, <i>he called the ‘woman of the house directly to partake of punch, and pass their time in merriment.’ Anecdotes of Dr. Johnson</i>, p. 119. BOSWELL. The whole transaction took place in 1762, as is shown, <i>ante</i>, p. 415, note 1; Johnson did not know the Thrales till 1764.</p>
		<p>[1233] Through Goldsmith Boswell became acquainted with Reynolds. In his <i>Letter to the People of Scotland</i> (p. 99), he says:⁠—‘I exhort you, my friends and countrymen, in the words of my departed <i>Goldsmith</i>, who gave me many nodes <i>Atticae</i>, and gave me a jewel of the finest water⁠—the acquaintance of Sir Joshua Reynolds.’</p>
		<p>[1234] See <i>post</i>, July 30, 1763.</p>
		<p>[1235] See <i>post</i>, March 20, 1776, and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 17, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1236] See <i>post</i>, March 15, 1776.</p>
		<p>[1237] ‘Dr. Campbell was an entertaining story-teller, which [<i>sic</i>] sometimes he rather embellished; so that the writer of this once heard Dr. Johnson say:⁠—“Campbell will lie, but he never lies on paper.” ’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for 1785, p. 969.</p>
		<p>[1238] I am inclined to think that he was misinformed as to this circumstance. I own I am jealous for my worthy friend Dr. John Campbell. For though Milton could without remorse absent himself from publick worship [Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vii. 115] I cannot. On the contrary, I have the same habitual impressions upon my mind, with those of a truely venerable Judge, who said to Mr. Langton, ‘Friend Langton, if I have not been at church on Sunday, I do not feel myself easy.’ Dr. Campbell was a sincerely religious man. Lord Macartney, who is eminent for his variety of knowledge, and attention to men of talents, and knew him well, told me, that when he called on him in a morning, he found him reading a chapter in the Greek New Testament, which he informed his Lordship was his constant practice. The quantity of Dr. Campbell’s composition is almost incredible, and his labours brought him large profits. Dr. Joseph Warton told me that Johnson said of him, ‘He is the richest authour that ever grazed the common of literature.’ BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1239] See <i>post</i>, April 7, 1778. Campbell complied with one of the <i>Monita Padagogica</i> of Erasmus. ‘Si quem praeteribis natu grandem, magistratum, sacerdotem, doctorem⁠ ⁠… memento aperire caput.⁠ ⁠… Itidem facito quum praeteribis asdem sacram.’ Erasmus’s <i>Colloquies</i>, ed. 1867, i. 36.</p>
		<p>[1240] Reynolds said of Johnson:⁠—‘He was not easily imposed upon by professions to honesty and candour; but he appeared to have little suspicion of hypocrisy in religion.’ Taylor’s <i>Reynolds</i>, ii. 459. Boswell, in one of his penitent letters, wrote to Temple on July 21, 1790:⁠—‘I am even almost inclined to think with you, that my great oracle Johnson did allow too much credit to good principles, without good practice.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 327.</p>
		<p>[1241] Campbell lived in ‘the large new-built house at the north-west-corner of Queen Square, Bloomsbury, whither, particularly on a Sunday evening, great numbers of persons of the first eminence for science and literature resorted for the enjoyment of conversation.’ Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 210.</p>
		<p>[1242] Churchill, in his first poem, <i>The Rosciad</i> (Poems, i. 4), mentions Johnson without any disrespect among those who were thought of as judge.</p>
		<p>‘For Johnson some, but Johnson, it was feared,<br/>
		Would be too grave; and Sterne too gay appeared.’<br/></p>
		<p>In The Author (ib. ii. 36), if I mistake not, he grossly alludes to the convulsive disorder to which Johnson was subject. Attacking the pensioners he says⁠—the italics are his own:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Others, <i>half-palsied</i> only, mutes become,<br/>
		And what makes Smollett write makes Johnson dumb.’<br/></p>
		<p>[1243] See <i>post</i>, April 6, 1772, where Johnson called Fielding a blockhead.</p>
		<p>[1244] Churchill published his first poem, <i>The Rosciad</i>, in March or April 1761 (<i>Gent. Mag</i>. xxxi. 190); <i>The Apology</i> in May or June (<i>Ib</i>. p. 286); <i>Night</i> in Jan. 1762 (<i>Ib</i>. xxxii. 47); The First and Second Parts of The Ghost in March (<i>ib</i>. p. 147); The Third Part in the autumn (<i>ib</i>. p. 449); _The Prophecy of Famine _in Jan. 1763 (<i>ib</i>. xxxiii. 47), and <i>The Epistle to Hogarth</i> in this month of July (<i>ib</i>. p. 363). He wrote the fourth part of <i>The Ghost</i>, and nine more poems, and died on Nov. 4, 1764, aged thirty-two or thirty-three.</p>
		<p>[1245] ‘Cowper had a higher opinion of Churchill than of any other contemporary writer. “It is a great thing,” he said, “to be indeed a poet, and does not happen to more than one man in a century; but Churchill, the great Churchill, deserved that name.” He made him, more than any other writer, his model.’ Southey’s <i>Cowper</i>, i. 87, 8.</p>
		<p>[1246] Mr. Forster says that ‘Churchill asked five guineas for the manuscript of <i>The Rosciad</i> (according to Southey, but Mr. Tooke says he asked twenty pounds).’ Finding no purchaser he brought the poem out at his own risk. Mr. Forster continues:⁠—‘The pulpit had starved him on forty pounds a year; the public had given him a thousand pounds in two months.’ Forster’s <i>Essays</i>, ii. 226, 240. As _The Rosciad _was sold at one shilling a copy, it seems incredible that such a gain could have been made, even with the profits of <i>The Apology</i> included. ‘Blotting and correcting was so much Churchill’s abhorrence that I have heard from his publisher he once energetically expressed himself, that it was like cutting away one’s own flesh.’ D’Israeli’s <i>Curiosities of Literature</i>, ed. 1834, iii. 129. D’Israeli ‘had heard that after a successful work he usually precipitated the publication of another, relying on its crudeness being passed over by the public curiosity excited by its better brother. He called this getting double pay, for thus he secured the sale of a hurried work.’</p>
		<p>[1247] In the opening lines of <i>Gotham,</i> Bk. iii, there is a passage of great beauty and tenderness.</p>
		<p>[1248] In 1769 I set Thornton’s burlesque <i>Ode</i>. It was performed at Ranelagh in masks, to a very crowded audience, as I was told; for I then resided in Norfolk. BURNEY. Dr. Burney’s note cannot be correct. He came to reside in London in 1760 (<i>Memoirs of Dr. Burney</i>, i. 133) The Ode is in the list of ‘new books, published’ in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for June 1763, and is described as having been performed at Ranelagh.</p>
		<p>[1249] <i>The Connoisseur</i> was started by Thornton and Colman in 1754. Cowper and Lloyd were contributors. Southey’s <i>Cowper</i>, i. 46, 49, 65.</p>
		<p>[1250] See <i>ante</i>, p. 350, note.</p>
		<p>[1251] See <i>post</i>, Aug. 2, 1763, and Oct. 26, 1769.</p>
		<p>[1252] See <i>post</i>. Sept. 20, 1777, note.</p>
		<p>[1253] The northern bard mentioned page 421. When I asked Dr. Johnson’s permission to introduce him, he obligingly agreed; adding, however, with a sly pleasantry, ‘but he must give us none of his poetry.’ It is remarkable that Johnson and Churchill, however much they differed in other points, agreed on this subject. See Churchill’s <i>Journey</i>.</p>
		<p>[‘Under dark Allegory’s flimsy veil<br/>
		 Let Them with Ogilvie spin out a tale<br/>
		 Of rueful length,’<br/>
		 Churchill’s <i>Poems</i>, ii. 329.]<br/></p>
		<p>It is, however, but justice to Dr. Ogilvie to observe, that his <i>Day of<br/>
		Judgement</i> has no inconsiderable share of merit. BOSWELL.<br/></p>
		<p>[1254] ‘Johnson said:⁠—“Goldsmith should not be for ever attempting to <i>shine</i> in conversation.” ’ <i>Post</i>, April 27, 1773. See also <i>post</i>, May 7, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1255] Fifteen years later Lord George Germaine, Secretary of State, asserted in a debate ‘that the King “was his own Minister,” which Charles Fox took up admirably, lamenting that His Majesty “was his own <i>unadvised</i> Minister.” ’ Walpole’s <i>Journal of the Reign of George III</i>, ii. 314.</p>
		<p>[1256] ‘The general story of mankind will evince that lawful and settled authority is very seldom resisted when it is well employed.⁠ ⁠… Men are easily kept obedient to those who have temporal dominion in their hands, till their veneration is dissipated by such wickedness and folly as can neither be defended nor concealed.’ <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 50. See <i>post</i>, March 31, 1772.</p>
		<p>[1257] ‘It is natural to believe⁠ ⁠… that no writer has a more easy task than the historian. The philosopher has the works of omniscience to examine.⁠ ⁠… The poet trusts to his invention.⁠ ⁠… But the happy historian has no other labour than of gathering what tradition pours down before him, or records treasure for his use.’ <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 122.</p>
		<p>[1258] See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 21, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1259] ‘Arbuthnot was a man of great comprehension, skilful in his profession, versed in the sciences, acquainted with ancient literature, and able to animate his mass of knowledge by a bright and active imagination; a scholar with great brilliancy of wit; a wit, who in the crowd of life retained and discovered a noble ardour of religious zeal.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 296.</p>
		<p>[1260] Goldsmith wrote from Edinburgh in 1753:⁠—‘Shall I tire you with a description of this unfruitful country, where I must lead you over their hills all brown with heath, or their vallies scarce able to feed a rabbit? Man alone seems to be the only creature who has arrived to the natural size in this poor soil. Every part of the country presents the same dismal landscape.’ Forster’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 433.</p>
		<p>[1261] See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Nov. 10, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1262] Johnson would suffer none of his friends to fill up chasms in conversation with remarks on the weather: ‘Let us not talk of the weather.’ BURNEY.</p>
		<p>[1263] See <i>ante</i>, p. 332.</p>
		<p>[1264] Boswell wrote to Temple on Sept. 9, 1767:⁠—‘How unaccountable is it that my father and I should be so ill together! He is a man of sense and a man of worth; but from some unhappy turn in his disposition he is much dissatisfied with a son whom you know. I write to him with warmth, with an honest pride, wishing that he should think of me as I am; but my letters shock him, and every expression in them is interpreted unfavourably. To give you an instance, I send you a letter I had from him a few days ago. How galling is it to the friend of Paoli to be treated so! I have answered him in my own style; I will be myself.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 110. In the following passage in one of his <i>Hypochondriacks</i> he certainly describes his father. ‘I knew a father who was a violent Whig, and used to attack his son for being a Tory, upbraiding him with being deficient in “noble sentiments of liberty,” while at the same time he made this son live under his roof in such bondage, that he was not only afraid to stir from home without leave, like a child, but durst scarcely open his mouth in his father’s presence. This was sad living. Yet I would rather see such an excess of awe than a degree of familiarity between father and son by which all reverence is destroyed.’ <i>London Mag</i>. 1781, p. 253.</p>
		<p>[1265] Boswell, the day after this talk, wrote:⁠—‘I have had a long letter from my father, full of affection and good counsel. Honest man! he is now very happy: it is amazing to think how much he has had at heart, my pursuing the road of civil life.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 25.</p>
		<p>[1266] Gray, says Nicholls, ‘disliked all poetry in blank verse, except Milton.’ Gray’s <i>Works</i>, ed. 1858, v. 36. Goldsmith, in his <i>Present State of Polite Learning</i> (ch. xi.), wrote in 1759:⁠—‘From a desire in the critic of grafting the spirit of ancient languages upon the English have proceeded of late several disagreeable instances of pedantry. Among the number, I think, we may reckon blank verse. Nothing but the greatest sublimity of subject can render such a measure pleasing; however, we now see it used upon the most trivial occasions.’ On the same page he speaks of ‘the tuneless flow of our blank verse.’ See <i>post</i>, 1770, in Dr. Maxwell’s <i>Collectanea</i> and the beginning of 1781, under <i>The Life of Milton</i>, for Johnson’s opinion of blank verse.</p>
		<p>[1267] ‘Johnson told me, that one day in London, when Dr. Adam Smith was boasting of Glasgow, he turned to him and said, “Pray, Sir, have you ever seen Brentford?’ ” Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 29, 1773. See <i>post</i>, April 29, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1268] ‘He advised me to read just as inclination prompted me, which alone, he said, would do me any good; for I had better go into company than read a set task. He said, too, that I should prescribe to myself five hours a day, and in these hours gratify whatever literary desires may spring up.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 28. The Editor of these <i>Letters</i> compares Tranio’s advice:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘No profit grows where is no pleasure ta’en:<br/>
		In brief, Sir, study what you most affect.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>Taming of the Shrew</i>, act i. sc. I.</p>
		<p>‘Johnson used to say that no man read long together with a folio on his table. “Books,” said he, “that you may carry to the fire, and hold readily in your hand, are the most useful after all.” ’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i> (1787), xi. 197. See also <i>The Idler</i>, No. 67, and <i>post</i>, April 12, 1776, and under Sept. 22, 1777.</p>
		<p>[1269] Wilkes, among others, had attacked him in Aug. 1762 in <i>The North Briton</i>, Nos. xi. and xii.</p>
		<p>[1270] When I mentioned the same idle clamour to him several years afterwards, he said, with a smile, ‘I wish my pension were twice as large, that they might make twice as much noise.’ BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1271] In one thing at least he was changed. He could now indulge in the full bent, to use his own words (<i>Works</i>, viii. l36), ‘that inquisitiveness which must always be produced in a vigorous mind, by an absolute freedom from all pressing or domestick engagements.’</p>
		<p>[1272] See <i>post</i>, April 13, 1773, Sept. 17 and 19, 1777, March 21, 1783, and June 9, 1784. Lord Shelburne says:⁠—‘After the Revolution the Tory and Jacobite parties had become almost identified by their together opposing the Court for so many years, and still more by the persecution which they suffered in common, for it was the policy of Sir Robert Walpole to confound them as much as possible, so as to throw the Jacobite odium upon every man who opposed government.’ Fitzmaurice’s <i>Shelburne</i>, i. 35. Lord Bolingbroke (<i>Works</i>, iii. 28) complains that the writers on the side of the ministry ‘frequently throw out that every man is a friend to the Pretender who is not a friend of Walpole.’</p>
		<p>[1273] See <i>post</i>, April 6, 1775</p>
		<p>[1274] <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>, 3rd edit. p. 402 [Nov. 10]. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1275] Mr. Walmsley died in 1751 (<i>ante</i>, p. 81). Johnson left Lichfield in 1737. Unless Mr. Walmsley after 1737 visited London from time to time, he can scarcely be meant.</p>
		<p>[1276] See <i>ante</i>, p. 336.</p>
		<p>[1277] He used to tell, with great humour, from my relation to him, the following little story of my early years, which was literally true: ‘Boswell, in the year 1745, was a fine boy, wore a white cockade, and prayed for King James, till one of his uncles (General Cochran) gave him a shilling on condition that he should pray for King George, which he accordingly did. So you see (says Boswell) that <i>Whigs of all ages are made the same way</i>.’ BOSWELL. Johnson, in his <i>Dictionary</i> under <i>Whiggism</i>, gives only one quotation, namely, from Swift: ‘I could quote passages from fifty pamphlets, wholly made up of whiggism and atheism.’ See <i>post</i>, April 28, 1778, where he said: ‘I have always said, the first <i>Whig</i> was the Devil;’ and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 21 and Nov. 8, 1773. To Johnson’s sayings might be opposed one of Lord Chatham’s in the House of Lords: ‘There are some distinctions which are inherent in the nature of things. There is a distinction between right and wrong⁠—between Whig and Tory.’ <i>Parl. Hist</i>. xvi. 1107.</p>
		<p>[1278] <i>Letter to Rutland on Travel</i>, 16mo. 1569. BOSWELL. This letter is contained in a little volume entitled, <i>Profitable Instructions; describing what special observations are to be taken by travellers in all nations, states and countries; pleasant and profitable. By the three much admired, Robert, late Earl of Essex, Sir Philip Sidney, and Secretary Davison. London. Printed for Benjamin Fisher, at the Sign of the Talbot, without Aldersgate</i>. 1633. (Lowndes gives the date of 1613, but the earliest edition seems to be this of 1633.) The letter from which Boswell quotes is entitled, <i>The late E. of E. his advice to the E. of R. in his Travels</i>. It is dated Greenwich, Jan. 4, 1596. Mr. Spedding (Bacon’s <i>Works</i>, ix. 4) suggests that ‘it may have been (wholly or in part) written by Bacon.’</p>
		<p>[1279] Boswell (<i>Boswelliana</i>, p. 210) says that this ‘impudent fellow’ was Macpherson.</p>
		<p>[1280] Boswell repeated this saying and some others to Paoli. ‘I felt an elation of mind to see Paoli delighted with the sayings of Mr. Johnson, and to hear him translate them with Italian energy to the Corsican heroes.’ Here Boswell describes the person as ‘a certain authour.’ Boswell’s <i>Corsica</i>, p. 199</p>
		<p>[1281] Boswell thus takes him off in his comic poem <i>The Court of Session Garland</i>:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘ “This cause,” cries Hailes, “to judge I can’t pretend, For <i>justice</i>, I percieve, wants an <i>e</i> at the end.” ’</p>
		<p>Mr. R. Chambers, in a note on this, says:⁠—‘A story is told of Lord Hailes once making a serious objection to a law-paper, an in consequence to the whole suit, on account of the word <i>justice</i> being thus spelt. <i>Traditions of Edinburgh</i>, ii. 161. Burke says that he ‘found him to be a clever man, and generally knowing.’ Burke’s <i>Corres</i>. iii. 301. See <i>ante</i> p. 267, and <i>post</i> May 12, 1774 and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 17, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1282] ‘Ita feri ut se mori sentiat.’ Suetonius, <i>Caligula</i>, chap. xxx.</p>
		<p>[1283] Johnson himself was constantly purposing to keep a journal. On April 11, 1773, he told Boswell ‘that he had twelve or fourteen times attempted to keep a journal of his life,’ <i>post</i>, April 11, 1773. The day before he had recorded:⁠—‘I hope from this time to keep a journal.’ <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 124. Like records follow, as:⁠—‘Sept. 24, 1773. My hope is, for resolution I dare no longer call it, to divide my time regularly, and to keep such a journal of my time, as may give me comfort in reviewing it.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 132. ‘April 6, 1777. My purpose once more is To keep a journal.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 161. ‘Jan. 2, 1781. My hope is To keep a journal.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 188. See also <i>post</i>, April 14, 1775, and April 10, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1284] Boswell, when he was only eighteen, going with his father to the [Scotch] Northern Circuit, ‘kept,’ he writes, ‘an exact journal.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 8. In the autumn of 1762 he also kept a journal which he sent to Temple to read. <i>Ib</i>. p. 19.</p>
		<p>[1285] ‘It has been well observed, that the misery of man proceeds not from any single crush of overwhelming evil, but from small vexations continually repeated.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 333. ‘The main of life is indeed composed of small incidents and petty occurrences.’ <i>Ib</i>. ii. 322. Dr. Franklin (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 199) says:⁠—‘Human felicity is produced not so much by great pieces of good fortune that seldom happen as by little advantages that occur every day.’</p>
		<p>[1286] Boswell wrote the next day:⁠—‘We sat till between two and three. He took me by the hand cordially, and said, “My dear Boswell, I love you very much.” Now Temple, can I help indulging vanity?’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 27. Fourteen years later Boswell was afraid that he kept Johnson too late up. ‘No, Sir,’ said he, ‘I don’t care though I sit all night with you.’ <i>Post</i>, Sept. 23, 1777. See also <i>post</i>, April 7, 1779, where Johnson, speaking of these early days, said to Boswell, ‘it was not the <i>wine</i> that made your head ache, but the sense that I put into it.’</p>
		<p>[1287] Tuesday was the 19th.</p>
		<p>[1288] ‘The elder brother of the first Lord Rokeby, called long Sir Thomas Robinson, on account of his height, and to distinguish him from Sir Thomas Robinson, first Lord Grantham. It was on his request for an epigram that Lord Chesterfield made the distich:⁠—</p>
		<p>“Unlike my subject will I make my song,<br/>
		It shall be witty, and it shan’t be long,”<br/></p>
		<p>and to whom he said in his last illness, “Ah, Sir Thomas, it will be sooner over with me than it would be with you, for I am dying by inches.” Lord Chesterfield was very short.’ CROKER. Southey, writing of Rokeby Hall, which belonged to Robinson, says that ‘Long Sir Thomas found a portrait of Richardson in the house; thinking Mr. Richardson a very unfit personage to be suspended in effigy among lords, ladies, and baronets, he ordered the painter to put him on the star and blue riband, and then christened the picture Sir Robert Walpole.’ Southey’s <i>Life</i>, iii. 346. See also <i>ante</i>, p. 259 note 2, and <i>post</i>, 1770, near the end of Dr. Maxwell’s <i>Collectanea</i>.</p>
		<p>[1289] Johnson (<i>Works</i>, vi. 440) had written of Frederick the Great in 1756:⁠—‘His skill in poetry and in the French language has been loudly praised by Voltaire, a judge without exception if his honesty were equal to his knowledge.’ Boswell, in his <i>Hypochondriacks</i>, records a conversation that he had with Voltaire on memory:⁠—‘I asked him if he could give me any notion of the situation of our ideas which we have totally forgotten at the time, yet shall afterwards recollect. He paused, meditated a little, and acknowledged his ignorance in the spirit of a philosophical poet by repeating as a very happy allusion a passage in Thomson’s <i>Seasons</i>⁠—“Aye,” said he, “Where sleep the winds when it is calm?” ’ <i>London Mag</i>. 1783, p. 157. The passage is in Thomson’s <i>Winter</i>, l. 116:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘In what far-distant region of the sky,<br/>
		Hush’d in deep silence, sleep ye when ‘ ’tis calm?’<br/></p>
		<p>[1290] See <i>post</i>, ii. 54, note 3.</p>
		<p>[1291] Bernard Lintot, the father, published Pope’s <i>Iliad</i> and <i>Odyssey</i>. Over the sale of the <i>Odyssey</i> a quarrel arose between the two men. Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 251, 274. Lintot is attacked in the <i>Dunciad</i>, i. 40 and ii. 53; He was High-Sheriff for Sussex in 1736⁠—the year of his death. <i>Gent. Mag</i>. vi. 110. The son is mentioned in Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 282.</p>
		<p>[1292] ‘July 19, 1763. I was with Mr. Johnson to-day. I was in his garret up four pair of stairs; it is very airy, commands a view of St. Paul’s and many a brick roof. He has many good books, but they are all lying in confusion and dust.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 30. On Good Friday, 1764, Johnson made the following entry:⁠—‘I hope to put my rooms in order: Disorder I have found one great cause of idleness.’ On his birth-day in the same year he wrote:⁠—‘To-morrow I purpose to regulate my room.’ <i>Pr. and Med</i>. pp. 50, 60.</p>
		<p>[1293] See <i>ante</i>, p. 140, and <i>post</i>, under Sept. 9, 1779.</p>
		<p>[1294] Afterwards Rector of Mamhead, Devonshire. He is the grandfather of the present Bishop of London. He and Boswell had been fellow-students at the University of Edinburgh, and seemed in youth to have had an equal amount of conceit. ‘Recollect,’ wrote Boswell, ‘how you and I flattered ourselves that we were to be the greatest men of our age.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 159. They began to correspond at least as early as 1758. The last letter was one from Boswell on his death-bed. Johnson thus mentions Temple (<i>Works</i>, viii. 480):⁠—‘Gray’s character I am willing to adopt, as Mr. Mason has done, from a letter written to my friend Mr. Boswell by the Revd. Mr. Temple, Rector of St. Gluvias in Cornwall; and am as willing as his warmest well-wisher to believe it true.’</p>
		<p>[1295] Johnson (<i>Works</i>, vii. 240) quotes the following by Edmund Smith, and written some time after 1708:⁠—‘It will sound oddly to posterity, that, in a polite nation, in an enlightened age, under the direction of the most literary property in 1710, whether by wise, most learned, and most generous encouragers of knowledge in the world, the property of a mechanick should be better secured than that of a scholar! that the poorest manual operations should be more valued than the noblest products of the brain! that it should be felony to rob a cobbler of a pair of shoes, and no crime to deprive the best authour of his whole subsistence! that nothing should make a man a sure title to his own writings but the stupidity of them!’ See <i>post</i>, May 8, 1773, and Feb.7, 1774; and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 17 and 20, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1296] The question arose, after the passing of the first statute respecting literary property in 1710, whether by certain of its provisions this perpetual copyright at common law was extinguished for the future. The question was solemnly argued before the Court of King’s Bench, when Lord Mansfield presided, in 1769. The result was a decision in favour of the common-law right as unaltered by the statute, with the disapproval however of Mr. Justice Yates. In 1774 the same point was brought before the House of Lords, and the decision of the court below reversed by a majority of six judges in eleven, as Lord Mansfield, who adhered to the opinion of the minority, declined to interfere; it being very unusual, from motives of delicacy, for a peer to support his own judgment on appeal to the House of Lords. <i>Penny Cylco</i>. viii. I. See <i>post</i>, Feb. 7, 1774. Lord Shelburne, on Feb 27, 1774, humourously describes the scene in the Lords to the Earl of Chatham:⁠—‘Lord Mansfield showed himself the merest Captain Bobadil that, I suppose, ever existed in real life. You can, perhaps, imagine to yourself the Bishop of Carlyle, an old metaphysical head of a college, reading a paper, not a speech, out of an old sermon book, with very bad sight leaning on the table, Lord Mansfield sitting at it, with eyes of fixed melancholy looking at him, knowing that the bishop’s were the only eyes in the House who could not meet his; the judges behind him, full of rage at being drawn into so absurd an opinion, and abandoned in it by their chief; the Bishops waking, as your Lordship knows they do, just before they vote, and staring on finding something the matter; while Lord Townshend was close to the bar, getting Mr. Dunning to put up his glass to look at the head of criminal justice.’ <i>Chatham Corres</i>. iv. 327.</p>
		<p>[1297] See <i>post</i> April 15 1778, note.</p>
		<p>[1298] Dr. Franklin (<i>Memoirs</i> iii. 178), complaining of the high prices of English books, describes ‘the excessive artifices made use of to puff up a paper of verses into a pamphlet, a pamphlet into an octavo, and an octavo into a quarto with white-lines, exorbitant margins, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, to such a degree that the selling of paper seems now the object, and printing on it only the pretence.’</p>
		<p>[1299] Boswell was on friendly terms with him. He wrote to Erskine on Dec. 2, 1761:⁠—‘I am just now returned from eating a most excellent pig with the most magnificent Donaldson.’ <i>Boswell and Erskine Correspondence</i>, p. 20.</p>
		<p>[1300] Dr. Carlyle (<i>Auto</i>. p. 516) says that Lord Mansfield this year (1769) ‘talking of Hume and Robertson’s <i>Histories</i>, said that though he could point out few or no faults in them, yet, when he was reading their books, he did not think he was reading English.’ See <i>post</i>, ii. 72, for Hume’s Scotticisms. Hume went to France in 1734 when he was 23 years old and stayed there three years. Hume’s <i>Autobiography</i>, p. vii. He never mastered French colloquially. Lord Charlemont, who met him in Turin in 1748, says:⁠—‘His speech in English was rendered ridiculous by the broadest Scotch accent, and his French was, if possible, still more laughable.’ Hardy’s <i>Charlemont</i>, i. 15. Horace Walpole, who met him in Paris in 1765, writes (<i>Letters</i>, iv. 426):⁠—‘Mr. Hume is the only thing in the world that they [the French] believe implicitly; which they must do, for I defy them to understand any language that he speaks.’ Gibbon (<i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 122) says of Hume’s writings:⁠—‘Their careless inimitable beauties often forced me to close the volume with a mixed sensation of delight and despair.’ Dr. Beattie (<i>Life</i>, p. 243) wrote on Jan. 5, 1778:⁠—‘We who live in Scotland are obliged to study English from books, like a dead language, which we understand, but cannot speak.’ He adds:⁠—‘I have spent some years in labouring to acquire the art of giving a vernacular cast to the English we write.’ Dr. A. Carlyle (<i>Auto</i>, p. 222) says:⁠—‘Since we began to affect speaking a foreign language, which the English dialect is to us, humour, it must be confessed, is less apparent in conversation.’</p>
		<p>[1301] <i>Discours sur L’origine et les fondemens de l’inégalité parmi les hommes</i>, 1754.</p>
		<p>[1302] ‘I have indeed myself observed that my banker ever bows lowest to me when I wear my full-bottomed wig, and writes me Mr. or Esq., accordingly as he sees me dressed.’ <i>Spectator</i>, No. 150.</p>
		<p>[1303] Mr. Croker, quoting Mr. Wright, says:⁠—’<i>See his Quantulumanque</i> (sic) <i>concerning Money</i>.’ I have read Petty’s <i>Quantulumcunque</i>, but do not find the passage in it.</p>
		<p>[1304] Johnson told Dr. Burney that Goldsmith said, when he first began to write, he determined to commit to paper nothing but what was <i>new</i>; but he afterwards found that what was <i>new</i> was false, and from that time was no longer solicitous about novelty. BURNEY. Mr. Forster (<i>Life of Goldsmith</i>, i. 421) says that this note ‘is another instance of the many various and doubtful forms in which stories about Johnson and Goldsmith are apt to appear when once we lose sight of the trustworthy Boswell. This is obviously a mere confused recollection of what is correctly told by Boswell [<i>post</i>, March 26, 1779].’ There is much truth in Mr. Forster’s general remark: nevertheless Burney likely enough repeated to the best of his memory what he had himself heard from Johnson.</p>
		<p>[1305] ‘Their [the ancient moralists’] arguments have been, indeed, so unsuccessful, that I know not whether it can be shewn, that by all the wit and reason which this favourite cause has called forth a single convert was ever made; that even one man has refused to be rich, when to be rich was in his power, from the conviction of the greater happiness of a narrow fortune.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, ii. 278. See <i>post</i>, June 3, 1781, and June 3, Sept. 7, and Dec. 7, 1782.</p>
		<p>[1306] Johnson (<i>Works</i>, vi. 440) shows how much Frederick owed to ‘the difficulties of his youth.’ ‘Kings, without this help from temporary infelicity, see the world in a mist, which magnifies everything near them, and bounds their view to a narrow compass, which few are able to extend by the mere force of curiosity.’ He next points out what Cromwell ‘owed to the private condition in which he first entered the world;’ and continues:⁠—‘The King of Prussia brought to the throne the knowledge of a private man, without the guilt of usurpation. Of this general acquaintance with the world there may be found some traces in his whole life. His conversation is like that of other men upon common topicks, his letters have an air of familiar elegance, and his whole conduct is that of a man who has to do with men.’</p>
		<p>[1307] See <i>ante</i> p. 408</p>
		<p>[1308] See <i>ante</i>, p. 298.</p>
		<p>[1309] That this was Mr. Dempster seems likely from the <i>Letters of Boswell</i> (p. 34), where Boswell says:⁠—‘I had prodigious satisfaction to find Dempster’s sophistry (which he has learnt from Hume and Rousseau) vanquished by the solid sense and vigorous reasoning of Johnson. Dempster,’ he continues, ‘was as happy as a vanquished argumentator could be.’ The character of the ‘benevolent good man’ suits Dempster (see <i>post</i>, under Feb. 7, 1775, where Boswell calls him ‘the virtuous and candid Dempster’), while that of the ‘noted infidel writer’ suits Hume. We find Boswell, Johnson, and Dempster again dining together on May 9, 1772.</p>
		<p>[1310]</p>
		<p>‘Thou wilt at best but suck a bull,<br/>
		Or sheer swine, all cry and no wool.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>Hudibras</i>, Part i. Canto I. 1. 851.</p>
		<p>Dr. Z. Grey, in his note on these lines, quotes the proverbial saying ‘As wise as the Waltham calf that went nine times to suck a bull.’ He quotes also from <i>The Spectator</i>, No. 138, the passage where the Cynic said of two disputants, ‘One of these fellows is milking a ram, and the other holds the pail.’</p>
		<p>[1311] The writer of the article <i>Vacuum</i> in the <i>Penny Cyclo</i>. (xxvi. 76), quoting Johnson’s words, adds:⁠—‘That is, either all space is full of matter, or there are parts of space which have no matter. The alternative is undeniable, and the inference to which the modern philosophy would give the greatest probablility is, that all space is full of matter in the common sense of the word, but really occupied by particles of matter with vacuous interstices.’</p>
		<p>[1312] ‘When any one tells me that he saw a dead man restored to life, I immediately consider with myself, whether it be more probable that this person should either deceive or be deceived, or that the fact which he relates should really have happened.’ Humes <i>Essay on Miracles</i>, Part i. See <i>post</i> Sept. 22 1777, where Boswell again quoted this passage.</p>
		<p>[1313] A coffee-house over against Catherine Street, now the site of a tourists’ ticket office. <i>Athenaeum</i>, No. 3041.</p>
		<p>[1314] Stockdale records (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 202) that Johnson once said to him:⁠—‘Whenever it is the duty of a young and old man to act at the same time with a spirit of independence and generosity; we may always have reason to hope that the young man will ardently perform, and to fear that the old man will desert, his duty.’</p>
		<p>[1315] Boswell thus writes of this evening:⁠—‘I learn more from him than from any man I ever was with. He told me a very odd thing, that he knew at eighteen as much as he does now; that is to say, his judgment is much stronger, but he had then stored up almost all the facts he has now, and he says that he has led but an idle life; only think, Temple, of that!’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 34. See <i>ante</i>, p. 56, and <i>post</i>, ii. 36. He told Windham in 1784 ‘that he read Latin with as much ease when he went to college as at present.’ Windham’s <i>Diary</i>, p. 17.</p>
		<p>[1316] Johnson in 1739 wrote of ‘those distempers and depressions, from which students, not well acquainted with the constitution of the human body, sometimes fly for relief to wine instead of exercise, and purchase temporary ease, by the hazard of the most dreadful consequences.’ <i>Works</i>, vi. 271. In <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 85, he says:⁠—‘How much happiness is gained, and how much misery is escaped, by frequent and violent agitation of the body.’ Boswell records (<i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 24, 1773):⁠—‘Dr. Johnson told us at breakfast, that he rode harder at a fox-chace than anybody.’ Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 206) says:⁠—‘He certainly rode on Mr. Thrale’s old hunter with a good firmness, and, though he would follow the hounds fifty miles an end sometimes, would never own himself either tired or amused. I think no praise ever went so close to his heart, as when Mr. Hamilton called out one day upon Brighthelmstone Downs, “Why Johnson rides as well, for aught I see, as the most illiterate fellow in England.” ’ He wrote to Mrs. Thrale in 1777:⁠—‘No season ever was finer. Barley, malt, beer and money. There is the series of ideas. The deep logicians call it a <i>sorites</i>. <i>I hope my master will no longer endure the reproach of not keeping me a horse</i>.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 360. See <i>post</i>, March 19 and 28, 1776, Sept. 20, 1777, and Nov. 21, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1317] This <i>one</i> Mrs. Macaulay was the same personage who afterwards made herself so much known as ‘the celebrated female historian.’ BOSWELL. Hannah More (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 234) tells the following story of Mrs. Macaulay’s daughter:⁠—‘Desirous from civility to take some notice of her, and finding she was reading <i>Shakespeare</i>, I asked her if she was not delighted with many parts of <i>King John</i>. “I never read the <i>Kings</i>, ma’am,” was the truly characteristic reply.’ See <i>post</i>, April 13, 1773, and May 15, 1776.</p>
		<p>[1318] This speech was perhaps suggested to Johnson by the following passage in <i>The Government of the Tongue</i> (p. 106)⁠—a book which he quotes in his <i>Dictionary</i>:⁠—‘Lycurgus once said to one who importuned him to establish a popular parity in the state, “Do thou,” says he, “begin it first in thine own family.” ’</p>
		<p>[1319] The first volume was published in 1756, the second in 1782.</p>
		<p>[1320] Warton, to use his own words, ‘did not think Pope at the head of his profession. In other words, in that species of poetry wherein Pope excelled, he is superior to all mankind; and I only say that this species of poetry is not the most excellent one of the art.’ He disposes the English poets in four classes, placing in the first only Spenser, Shakespeare, and Milton. ‘In the second class should be ranked such as possessed the true poetical genius in a more moderate degree, but who had noble talents for moral, ethical, and panegyrical poetry.’ In this class, in his concluding volume, he says, ‘we may venture to assign Pope a place, just above Dryden. Yet, to bring our minds steadily to make this decision, we must forget, for a moment, the divine <i>Music Ode of Dryden</i>; and may, perhaps, then be compelled to confess that though Dryden be the greater genius, yet Pope is the better artist.’ Warton’s <i>Essay</i>, i. i, vii. and ii. 404. See <i>post</i>, March 31, 1772.</p>
		<p>[1321] Mr. Croker believes Joseph Warton was meant. His father, however, had been Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, and was afterwards Vicar of Basingstoke and Cobham, and Professor of Poetry in his own University, so that the son could scarcely be described as being ‘originally poor.’ It is, no doubt, after Boswell’s fashion to introduce in consecutive paragraphs the same person once by name and once anonymously; but then the ‘certain author who disgusted Boswell by his forwardness,’ mentioned just before Warton, may be Warton himself.</p>
		<p>[1322] ‘When he arrived at Eton he could not make a verse; that is, he wanted a point indispensable with us to a certain rank in our system. But this wonderful boy, having satisfied the Master [Dr. Barnard] that he was an admirable scholar, and possessed of genius, was at once placed at the head of a form. He acquired the rules of Latin verse; tried his powers; and perceiving that he could not rise above his rivals in Virgil, Ovid, or the lyric of Horace, he took up the <i>sermoni propiora</i>, and there overshadowed all competitors. In the following lines he describes the hammer of the auctioneer with a mock sublimity which turns Horace into Virgil:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Jam-jamque cadit, celerique recursu<br/>
		Erigitur, lapsum retrahens, perque aera nutat.’<br/></p>
		<p>Nichols’s <i>Lit. Anec</i>. viii. 547.</p>
		<p>Horace Walpole wrote of him in Sept. 1765 (<i>Letters</i>, iv. 411):⁠—‘He is a very extraordinary young man for variety of learning. He is rather too wise for his age, and too fond of showing it; but when he has seen more of the world, he will choose to know less.’ He died at Rome in the following year. Hume, on hearing the news, wrote to Adam Smith:⁠—‘Were you and I together, dear Smith, we should shed tears at present for the death of poor Sir James Macdonald. We could not possibly have suffered a greater loss than in that valuable young man.’ J. H. Burton’s <i>Hume</i>, ii. 349. See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Sept. 5, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1323] Boswell says that Macdonald had for Johnson ‘a <i>great</i> terrour.’ (<i>Boswelliana</i>, p. 216.) Northcote (<i>Life of Reynolds</i>, i. 329) says:⁠—‘It is a fact that a certain nobleman, an intimate friend of Reynolds, had strangely conceived in his mind such a formidable idea of all those persons who had gained great fame as literary characters, that I have heard Sir Joshua say, he verily believed he could no more have prevailed upon this noble person to dine at the same table with Johnson and Goldsmith than with two tigers.’ According to Mr. Seward (<i>Biographiana</i>, p. 600), Mrs. Cotterell having one day asked Dr. Johnson to introduce her to a celebrated writer, ‘Dearest madam,’ said he, ‘you had better let it alone; the best part of every author is in general to be found in his book, I assure you.’ Mr. Seward refers to <i>The Rambler</i>, No. 14, where Johnson says that ‘there has often been observed a manifest and striking contrariety between the life of an authour and his writings.’</p>
		<p>[1324] See <i>post</i>, Jan. 19, 1775. In his <i>Hebrides</i> (p. i) Boswell writes:⁠—‘When I was at Ferney, in 1764, I mentioned our design to Voltaire. He looked at me as if I had talked of going to the North Pole, and said, “You do not insist on my accompanying you?” “No, Sir.” “Then I am very willing you should go.” ’</p>
		<p>[1325] ‘When he went through the streets he desired to have one to lead him by the hand. They asked his opinion of the high church. He answered that it was a large rock, yet there were some in St. Kilda much higher, but that these were the best caves he ever saw; for that was the idea which he conceived of the pillars and arches upon which the church stands.’ M. Martin’s <i>Western Isles</i>, p. 297. Mr. Croker compares the passage in <i>The Spectator</i> (No. 50), in which an Indian king is made to say of St. Paul’s:⁠—‘It was probably at first an huge misshapen rock that grew upon the top of the hill, which the natives of the country (after having cut it into a kind of regular figure) bored and hollowed with incredible pains and industry.’</p>
		<p>[1326] Boswell, writing to Temple the next day, slightly varies these words:⁠—‘He said, “My dear Boswell, it would give me great pain to part with you, if I thought we were not to meet again.” ’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 34.</p>
		<p>[1327] Gibbon (<i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 43) protests against ‘the trite and lavish praise of the happiness of our boyish years, which is echoed with so much affectation in the world. That happiness I have never known, that time I have never regretted. The poet may gaily describe the short hours of recreation; but he forgets the daily tedious labours of the school, which is approached each morning with anxious and reluctant steps.’ See <i>ante</i>, p. 44, and <i>post</i>, under Feb. 27, 1772.</p>
		<p>[1328] About fame Gibbon felt much as Johnson did. ‘I am disgusted,’ he wrote (<i>ib</i>. 272), ‘with the affectation of men of letters, who complain that they have renounced a substance for a shadow, and that their fame (which sometimes is no insupportable weight) affords a poor compensation for envy, censure, and persecution. My own experience, at least, has taught me a very different lesson; twenty happy years have been animated by the labour of my <i>History</i>, and its success has given me a name, a rank, a character, in the world, to which I should not otherwise have been entitled.’</p>
		<p>[1329] See <i>ante</i>, p. 432.</p>
		<p>[1330] See <i>ante</i>, p. 332.</p>
		<p>[1331] This opinion was given by him more at large at a subsequent period. See <i>Journal of a Tour of the Hebrides</i>, 3rd edit. p. 32 [Aug. 16]. BOSWELL. ‘That Swift was its author, though it be universally believed, was never owned by himself, nor very well proved by any evidence; but no other claimant can be produced, and he did not deny it when Archbishop Sharpe and the Duchess of Somerset, by showing it to the Queen, debarred him from a bishoprick.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 197. See also <i>post</i>, March 24, 1775. Stockdale records (<i>Memoirs</i>, ii. 61) that Johnson said ‘that if Swift really was the author of <i>The Tale of the Tub</i>, as the best of his other performances were of a very inferior merit, he should have hanged himself after he had written it.’ Scott (<i>Life of Swift</i>, ed. 1834, p. 77) says:⁠—‘Mrs. Whiteway observed the Dean, in the latter years of his life [in 1735], looking over the <i>Tale</i>, when suddenly closing the book he muttered, in an unconscious soliloquy, “Good God! what a genius I had when I wrote that book!” She begged it of him, who made some excuse at the moment; but on her birthday he presented her with it inscribed, “From her affectionate cousin.” On observing the inscription, she ventured to say, “I wish, Sir, you had said the gift of the author!” The Dean bowed, smiled good-humouredly, and answered, “No, I thank you,” in a very significant manner.’ There is this to be said of Johnson’s incredulity about the <i>Tale of a Tub</i>, that the <i>History of John Bull</i> and the <i>Memoirs of Martinus Scriblerus</i>, though both by Arbuthnot, were commonly assigned to Swift and are printed in his <i>Works</i>.</p>
		<p>[1332] ‘Thomson thinks in a peculiar train, and he thinks always as a man of genius; he looks round on Nature and on Life with the eye which Nature bestows only on a poet;⁠—the eye that distinguishes in everything presented to its view whatever there is on which imagination can delight to be detained, and with a mind that at once comprehends the vast, and attends to the minute.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, viii. 377. See <i>post</i>, ii. 63, and April 11, 1776.</p>
		<p>[1333] Burke seems to be meant. See <i>post</i>, April 25, 1778, and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 15, and Sept. 15, 1773.⁠—It is strange however that, while in these three places Boswell mentions Burke’s name, he should leave a blank here. In <i>Boswelliana</i>, p. 328, Boswell records:⁠—‘Langton said Burke hammered his wit upon an anvil, and the iron was cold. There were no sparks flashing and flying all about.’</p>
		<p>[1334] In <i>Boswelliana</i> (p. 214) this anecdote is thus given:⁠—‘Boswell was talking to Mr. Samuel Johnson of Mr. Sheridan’s enthusiasm for the advancement of eloquence. “Sir,” said Mr. Johnson, “it won’t do. He cannot carry through his scheme. He is like a man attempting to stride the English Channel. Sir, the cause bears no proportion to the effect. It is setting up a candle at Whitechapel to give light at Westminster.” ’ See also <i>ante</i>, p. 385, and <i>post</i>. Oct. 16, 1969, April 18 and May 17, 1783.</p>
		<p>[1335] Most likely Boswell himself. See <i>ante</i>, p. 410.</p>
		<p>[1336] ‘Let a Frenchman talk twice with a minister of state, he desires no more to furnish out a volume.’ Swift’s <i>Works</i>, ed. 1803, xvi. 197. Lord Chesterfield wrote from Paris in 1741:⁠—‘They [the Parisians] despise us, and with reason, for our ill-breeding; on the other hand, we despite them for their want of learning, and we are in the right of it.’ <i>Supplement to Chesterfield’s Letters</i>, p. 49. See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 14, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1337] ‘Dr. Johnson said that he had been told by an acquaintance of Sir Isaac Newton, that in early life he started as a clamorous infidel.’ Seward’s <i>Anecdotes</i>, ii. 324. In Brewster’s <i>Life of Newton</i> I find no mention of early infidelity. On the contrary, Newton had been described as one who ‘had been a searcher of the Scriptures from his youth’ (ii. 314). Brewster says that ‘some foreign writers have endeavoured to shew that his theological writings were composed at a late period of life, when his mind was in its dotage.’ It was not so, however. <i>Ib</i>. p. 315.</p>
		<p>[1338] I fully intended to have followed advice of such weight; but having staid much longer both in Germany and Italy than I proposed to do, and having also visited Corsica, I found that I had exceeded the time allowed me by my father, and hastened to France in my way homewards. BOSWELL. See <i>ante</i>, p. 410.</p>
		<p>[1339]</p>
		<p>‘Has heaven reserved, in pity to the poor,<br/>
		No pathless waste, or undiscovered shore?<br/>
		No secret island in the boundless main?<br/>
		No peaceful desert, yet unclaimed by Spain?’<br/></p>
		<p>Johnson looked upon the discovery of America as a misfortune to mankind. In <i>Taxation no Tyranny</i> (<i>Works</i>, vi. 233) he says that ‘no part of the world has yet had reason to rejoice that Columbus found at last reception and employment. In the same year, in a year hitherto disastrous to mankind, by the Portuguese was discovered the passage of the Indies, and by the Spaniards the coast of America.’ On March 4, 1773, he wrote (Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, p. 248):⁠—‘I do not much wish well to discoveries, for I am always afraid they will end in conquest and robbery.’ See <i>ante</i>, p. 308, note 2, and post, March 21, 1775, and under Dec. 24, 1783.</p>
		<p>[1340] See <i>ante</i>, p. 394, note 2.</p>
		<p>[1341] <i>Letters written from Leverpoole, Chester, Corke, <abbr>etc.</abbr>,</i> by Samuel Derrick, 1767.</p>
		<p>[1342] _Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides, 3rd ed. p. 104 [Aug. 27, 1773]. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1343] Ibid. p. 142 [242, Sept. 22, 1773]. BOSWELL. Johnson added:⁠—‘but it was nothing.’ Derrick, in 1760, published Dryden’s <i>Misc. Works</i>, with an <i>Account of his Life</i>.</p>
		<p>[1344] He published a biographical work, containing an account of eminent writers, in three vols. 8vo. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1345]</p>
		<p>‘Thus the soft gifts of sleep conclude the day,<br/>
		And stretched on bulks, as usual, poets lay.’<br/></p>
		<p><i>The Dunciad</i>, ii. 420.</p>
		<p>In <i>Humphry Clinker</i>, in the Letter of June 10, in which is described the dinner given by S⁠⸺ to the poor authors, of one of them it is said:⁠—‘The only secret which he ever kept was the place of his lodgings; but it was believed that during the heats of summer he commonly took his repose upon a bulk.’ Johnson defines <i>bulk</i> as <i>a part of a building jutting out</i>.</p>
		<p>[1346] ‘Knowledge is certainly one of the means of pleasure, as is confessed by the natural desire which every mind feels of increasing its ideas⁠ ⁠… without knowing why we always rejoice when we learn, and grieve when we forget.’ <i>Rasselas</i>, ch. xi.</p>
		<p>[1347] In the days of Old London Bridge, as Mr. Croker points out, even when the tide would have allowed passengers to shoot it, those who were prudent landed above the bridge, and walked to some wharf below it.</p>
		<p>[1348] All who are acquainted with the history of religion, (the most important, surely, that concerns the human mind,) know that the appellation of Methodists was first given to a society of students in the University of Oxford, who about the year 1730 were distinguished by an earnest and <i>methodical</i> attention to devout exercises. This disposition of mind is not a novelty, or peculiar to any sect, but has been, and still may be found, in many christians of every denomination. Johnson himself was, in a dignified manner, a Methodist. In his <i>Rambler</i>, No. 110, he mentions with respect ‘the whole discipline of regulated piety;’ and in his <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, many instances occur of his anxious examination into his spiritual state. That this religious earnestness, and in particular an observation of the influence of the Holy Spirit, has sometimes degenerated into folly, and sometimes been counterfeited for base purposes, cannot be denied. But it is not, therefore, fair to decry it when genuine. The principal argument in reason and good sense against methodism is, that it tends to debase human nature, and prevent the generous exertions of goodness, by an unworthy supposition that GOD will pay no regard to them; although it is positively said in the scriptures that He ‘will reward every man according to his works.’ [St. Matthew xvi. 27.] But I am happy to have it [in] my power to do justice to those whom it is the fashion to ridicule, without any knowledge of their tenets; and this I can do by quoting a passage from one of their best apologists, Mr. Milner, who thus expresses their doctrine upon this subject. ‘Justified by faith, renewed in his faculties, and constrained by the love of Christ, their believer moves in the sphere of love and gratitude, and all his <i>duties</i> flow more or less from this principle. And though <i>they are accumulating for him in heaven a treasure of bliss proportioned to his faithfulness and activity, and it is by no means inconsistent with his principles to feel the force of this consideration</i>, yet love itself sweetens every duty to his mind; and he thinks there is no absurdity in his feeling the love of GOD as the grand commanding principle of his life.’ <i>Essays on several religious Subjects, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, by Joseph Milner, A.M., Master of the Grammar School of Kingston upon-Hull, 1789, p</i>. 11. BOSWELL. Southey (<i>Life of Wesley</i>, i. 41), mentioning the names given at Oxford to Wesley and his followers, continues:⁠—‘One person with less irreverence and more learning observed, in reference to their methodical manner of life, that a new sect of Methodists was sprung up, alluding to the ancient school of physicians known by that name.’ Wesley, in 1744, wrote <i>The Humble Address to the King of the Societies in derision called Methodists. Journal</i>, i. 437. He often speaks of ‘the people called Methodists,’ but sometimes he uses the term without any qualification. Mrs. Thrale, in 1780, wrote to Johnson:⁠—‘Methodist is considered always a term of reproach, I trust, because I never yet did hear that any one person called himself a Methodist.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 119.</p>
		<p>[1349] Wesley said:⁠—‘We should constantly use the most common, little, easy words (so they are pure and proper) which our language affords. When first I talked at Oxford to plain people in the Castle [the prison] or the town, I observed they gaped and stared. This quickly obliged me to alter my style, and adopt the language of those I spoke to; and yet there is a dignity in their simplicity, which is not disagreeable to those of the highest rank.’ Southey’s <i>Wesley</i>, i. 431. See <i>post</i>, 1770, in Dr. Maxwell’s <i>Collectanea</i>, Oct. 12, 1779, Aug. 30, 1780, and Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Nov. 10, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1350] In the original, <i>struck</i>.</p>
		<p>[1351] <i>Epigram</i>, Lib. ii. ‘In Elizabeth. Angliae Reg.’ MALONE.</p>
		<p>[1352] See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 23.</p>
		<p>[1353] Virgil, <i>Eclogues</i>, i. 5. Johnson, when a boy, turned the line thus:⁠—‘And the wood rings with Amarillis’ name.’ <i>Ante</i>, p. 51.</p>
		<p>[1354] Boswell said of Paoli’s talk about great men:⁠—‘I regret that the fire with which he spoke upon such occasions so dazzled me, that I could not recollect his sayings, so as to write them down when I retired from his presence.’ <i>Corsica</i>, p. 197.</p>
		<p>[1355] More passages than one in Boswell’s <i>Letters to Temple</i> shew this absence of relish. Thus in 1775 he writes:⁠—‘I perceive some dawnings of taste for the country’ (p. 216); and again:⁠—‘I will force a taste for natural beauties’ (p. 219).</p>
		<p>[1356] Milton’s <i>L’Allegro</i>, 1. 118.</p>
		<p>[1357] See <i>post</i>, April 2, 1775, and April 17, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1358] My friend Sir Michael Le Fleming. This gentleman, with all his experience of sprightly and elegant life, inherits, with the beautiful family Domain, no inconsiderable share of that love of literature, which distinguished his venerable grandfather, the Bishop of Carlisle. He one day observed to me, of Dr. Johnson, in a felicity of phrase, ‘There is a blunt dignity about him on every occasion.’ BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1359] Wordsworth’s lines to the Baronet’s daughter, Lady Fleming, might be applied to the father:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘Lives there a man whose sole delights<br/>
		Are trivial pomp and city noise,<br/>
		Hardening a heart that loathes or slights<br/>
		What every natural heart enjoys?’<br/></p>
		<p>Wordsworth’s <i>Poems</i>, iv. 338.</p>
		<p>[1360] Afterwards Lord Stowell. He was a member of Doctors’ Commons, the college of Civilians in London, who practised in the Ecclesiastical Courts and the Court of the Admiralty. See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 14, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1361] He repeated this advice on the death of Boswell’s father, <i>post</i>, Sept. 7, 1782.</p>
		<p>[1362] Johnson (<i>Works</i>, ix. 159) describes ‘the sullen dignity of the old castle.’ See also Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Nov. 4. 1773.</p>
		<p>[1363] Probably Burke’s <i>Vindication of Natural Society</i>, published in 1756 when Burke was twenty-six.</p>
		<p>[1364] See <i>ante</i>, p. 421.</p>
		<p>[1365] Boswell wrote to Temple on July 28, 1763:⁠—‘My departure fills me with a kind of gloom that quite overshadows my mind. I could almost weep to think of leaving dear London, and the calm retirement of the Inner Temple. This is very effeminate and very young, but I cannot help it.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 46.</p>
		<p>[1366] Mrs. Piozzi says (<i>Anec</i>. p. 297) that ‘Johnson’s eyes were so wild, so piercing, and at times so fierce, that fear was, I believe, the first emotion in the hearts of all his beholders.’</p>
		<p>[1367] Johnson was, in fact, the editor of this work, as appears from a letter of Mr. T. Davies to the Rev. Edm. Bettesworth:⁠—‘Reverend Sir⁠—I take the liberty to send you Roger Ascham’s works in English. Though Mr. Bennet’s name is in the title, the editor was in reality Mr. Johnson, the author of the <i>Rambler</i>, who wrote the life of the author, and added several notes. Mr. Johnson gave it to Mr. Bennet, for his advantage,’ <abbr>etc.</abbr>⁠—CROKER. Very likely Davies exaggerated Johnson’s share in the book. Bennet’s edition was published, not in 1763, but in 1761.</p>
		<p>[1368] ‘Lord Sheffield describes the change in Gibbon’s opinions caused by the reign of terror:⁠—‘He became a warm and zealous advocate for every sort of old establishment. I recollect in a circle where French affairs were the topic and some Portuguese present, he, seemingly with seriousness, argued in favour of the Inquisition at Lisbon, and said he would not, at the present moment, give up even that old establishment.’ <i>Gibbons’s Misc. Works</i>, i. 328. One of Gibbon’s correspondents told him in 1792, that the <i>Wealth of Nations</i> had been condemned by the Inquisition on account of ‘the lowness of its style and the looseness of the morals which it inculcates.’ <i>Ib</i>. ii. 479. See also <i>post</i>, May 7, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1369] Johnson wrote on Aug. 17, 1773:⁠—‘This morning I saw at breakfast Dr. Blacklock, the blind poet, who does not remember to have seen light, and is read to by a poor scholar in Latin, Greek, and French. He was originally a poor scholar himself. I looked on him with reverence.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 110. See also Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 17, 1773. Spence published an <i>Account of Blacklock</i>, in which he meanly omitted any mention of Hume’s great generosity to the blind poet. J. H. Burton’s <i>Hume</i>, i. 392. Hume asked Blacklock whether he connected colour and sound. ‘He answered, that as he met so often with the terms expressing colours, he had formed some false associations, but that they were of the intellectual kind. The illumination of the sun, for instance, he supposed to resemble the presence of a friend.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 389.</p>
		<p>[1370] They left London early and yet they travelled only 51 miles that day. The whole distance to Harwich is 71 miles. Paterson’s <i>Itinerary</i>, i. 323.</p>
		<p>[1371] Mackintosh (<i>Life</i>, ii. 162) writing of the time of William III, says that ‘torture was legal in Scotland, and familiar in every country of Europe but England. Was there a single writer at that time who had objected to torture? I think not.’ In the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for 1742 (p. 660) it is stated that ‘the King of Prussia has forbid the use of torture in his dominions.’ In 1747 (p. 298) we read that Dr. Blackwell, an English physician, had been put to the torture in Sweden. Montesquieu in the <i>Esprit des Lois</i>, vi. 17, published in 1748, writing of ‘la question ou torture centre les criminels,’ says:⁠—‘Nous voyons aujourd’hui une nation très-bien policée [la nation anglaise] la rejeter sans inconvénient. Elle n’est donc pas nécessaire par sa nature.’ Boswell in 1765 found that Paoli tortured a criminal with fire. <i>Corsica</i>, p. 158. Voltaire, in 1777, after telling how innocent men had been put to death with torture in the reign of Lewis XIV, continues⁠—‘Mais un roi a-t-il le temps de songer à ces menus details d’horreurs au milieu de ses fètes, de ses conquêtes, et de ses mattresses? Daignez vous en occuper, ô Louis XVI, vous qui n’avez aucune de ces distractions!’ Voltaire’s <i>Works</i>, xxvi. 332. Johnson, two years before Voltaire thus wrote, had been shown <i>la chambre de question</i>⁠—the torture-chamber-<i>in Paris</i>. <i>Post</i>, Oct. 17, 1775. It was not till the Revolution that torture was abolished in France. One of the Scotch judges in 1793, at the trial of Messrs. Palmer and Muir for sedition (<i>post</i>, June 3, 1781, note), ‘asserted that now the torture was banished, there was no adequate punishment for sedition.’ <i>Parl. Hist</i>. xxx. 1569.</p>
		<p>[1372] ‘A cheerful and good heart will have a care of his meat and drink.’ <i>Ecclesiasticus</i>, xxx. 25.</p>
		<p>‘Verecundari neminem apud mensam decet, Nam ibi de divinis atque humanis cernitur.’ <i>Trinummus</i>, act 2, sc. 4.</p>
		<p>Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 149) records that ‘Johnson often said, “that wherever the dinner is ill got, there is poverty, or there is avarice, or there is stupidity; in short, the family is somehow grossly wrong; for,” continued he, “a man seldom thinks with more earnestness of anything than he does of his dinner; and if he cannot get that well dressed, he should be suspected of inaccuracy in other things.” ’ Yet he ‘used to say that a man who rode out for an appetite consulted but little the dignity of human nature.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i> (1787), xi. 204.</p>
		<p>[1373] This essay is more against the practices of the parasite than gulosity. It is entitled <i>The art of living at the cost of others</i>. Johnson wrote to one of Mrs. Thrale’s children:⁠—‘Gluttony is, I think, less common among women than among men. Women commonly eat more sparingly, and are less curious in the choice of meat; but if once you find a woman gluttonous, expect from her very little virtue. Her mind is enslaved to the lowest and grossest temptation.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 298.</p>
		<p>[1374] Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 355) mentions ‘the greediness with which he ate, his total inattention to those among whom he was seated, and his profound silence at the moment of refection.’</p>
		<p>[1375] Cumberland (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 357) says:⁠—‘He fed heartily, but not voraciously, and was extremely courteous in his commendations of any dish that pleased his palate.’</p>
		<p>[1376] Johnson wrote to Mrs. Thrale on July 10, 1780:⁠—‘Last week I saw flesh but twice and I think fish once; the rest was pease. You are afraid, you say, lest I extenuate myself too fast, and are an enemy to violence; but did you never hear nor read, dear Madam, that every man has his <i>genius</i>, and that the great rule by which all excellence is attained and all success procured, is to follow <i>genius</i>; and have you not observed in all our conversations that my <i>genius</i> is always in extremes; that I am very noisy or very silent; very gloomy or very merry; very sour or very kind? And would you have me cross my <i>genius</i> when it leads me sometimes to voracity and sometimes to abstinence?’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 166.</p>
		<p>[1377] ‘This,’ he told Boswell, ‘was no intentional fasting, but happened just in the course of a literary life.’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 4, 1773. See <i>post</i>, April 17, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1378] In the last year of his life, when he knew that his appetite was diseased, he wrote to Mrs. Thrale:⁠—‘I have now an inclination to luxury which even your table did not excite; <i>for till now my talk was more about the dishes than my thoughts</i>. I remember you commended me for seeming pleased with my dinners when you had reduced your table; I am able to tell you with great veracity, that I never knew when the reduction began, nor should have known what it was made, had not you told me. <i>I now think and consult to-day what I shall eat to-morrow. This disease will, I hope, be cured</i>.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 362.</p>
		<p>[1379] Johnson’s visit to Gordon and Maclaurin are just mentioned in Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, under Nov. 11, 1772.</p>
		<p>[1380] The only nobleman with whom he dined ‘about the same time’ was Lord Elibank. After dining with him, ‘he supped,’ says Boswell, ‘with my wife and myself.’ <i>Ib</i>.</p>
		<p>[1381] See <i>post</i>, April 15, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1382] Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 102) says, ‘Johnson’s own notions about eating were nothing less than delicate; a leg of pork boiled till it dropped from the bone, a veal-pie with plums and sugar, or the outside cut of a salt buttock of beef were his favourite dainties.’ Cradock saw Burke at a tavern dinner send Johnson a very small piece of a pie, the crust of which was made with bad butter. ‘Johnson soon returned his plate for more. Burke exclaimed:⁠—“I am glad that you are able so well to relish this pie.” Johnson, not at all pleased that what he ate should ever be noticed, retorted:⁠—“There is a time of life, Sir, when a man requires the repairs of a table.” ’ Cradock’s <i>Memoirs</i>, i. 229. A passage in Baretti’s <i>Italy</i>, ii. 316, seems to show that English eating in general was not delicate. ‘I once heard a Frenchman swear,’ he writes, ‘that he hated the English, “parce qu’ils versent du beurre fondu sur leur veau rod.” ’</p>
		<p>[1383] ‘He had an abhorrence of affectation,’ said Mr. Langton. <i>Post</i>, 1780, in Mr. Langton’s <i>Collection</i>.</p>
		<p>[1384] At college he would not let his companions say <i>prodigious</i>. <i>Post</i>, April 17, 1778.</p>
		<p>[1385] See <i>post</i>, Sept. 19, 1777, and 1780 in Mr. Langton’s <i>Collection</i>. Dugald Stewart quotes a saying of Turgot:⁠—‘He who had never doubted of the existence of matter might be assured he had no turn for metaphysical disquisitions.’ <i>Life of Reid</i>, p. 416.</p>
		<p>[1386] Claude Buffier, born 1661, died 1737. Author of <i>Traité despremières vérités et de la source de nos jugements</i>.</p>
		<p>[1387]</p>
		<p>‘Not when a gilt buffet’s reflected pride<br/>
		Turns you from sound philosophy aside.’<br/></p>
		<p>Pope’s <i>Satires</i>, ii. 5.</p>
		<p>[1388] Mackintosh (<i>Life</i>, i. 71) said that ‘Burke’s treatise on the <i>Sublime and Beautiful</i> is rather a proof that his mind was not formed for pure philosophy; and if we may believe Boswell that it was once the intention of Mr. Burke to have written against Berkeley, we may be assured that he would not have been successful in answering that great speculator; or, to speak more correctly, that he could not have discovered the true nature of the questions in dispute, and thus have afforded the only answer consistent with the limits of the human faculties.’</p>
		<p>[1389] Goldsmith’s <i>Retaliation</i>.</p>
		<p>[1390] I have the following autograph letter written by Johnson to Dr. Taylor three weeks after Boswell’s departure.</p>
		<h5>‘DEAR SIR,</h5>
		<p>‘Having with some impatience reckoned upon hearing from you these two last posts, and been disappointed, I can form to myself no reason for the omission but your perturbation of mind, or disorder of body arising from it, and therefore I once more advise removal from Ashbourne as the proper remedy both for the cause and the effect.</p>
		<p>‘You perhaps ask, whither should I go? any whither where your case is not known, and where your presence will cause neither looks nor whispers. Where you are the necessary subject of common talk, you will not safely be at rest.</p>
		<p>‘If you cannot conveniently write to me yourself let somebody write for you to</p>
		<p>‘Dear Sir,</p>
		<p>‘Your most affectionate,</p>
		<h5>‘SAM. JOHNSON.</h5>
		<p>‘August 25, 1763.</p>
		<p>‘To the Reverend Dr. Taylor<br/>
		 in Ashbourne,<br/>
		 Derbyshire.’<br/></p>
		<p>Five other letters on the same subject are given in <i>Notes and Queries</i>, 6th S. v. pp. 324, 342, 382. Taylor and his wife ‘never lived very well together’ (p. 325), and at last she left him. On May 22nd of the next year Johnson congratulated Taylor ‘upon the happy end of so vexatious an affair, the happyest [sic] that could be next to reformation and reconcilement’ (p. 382). Taylor did not follow the advice to leave Ashbourne; for on Sept. 3 Johnson wrote to him:⁠—‘You seem to be so well pleased to be where you are, that I shall not now press your removal; but do not believe that every one who rails at your wife wishes well to you. A small country town is not the place in which one would chuse to quarrel with a wife; every human being in such places is a spy.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 343.</p>
		<p>[1391] According to Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 210) he was accompanied by his black servant Frank. ‘I must have you know, ladies,’ said he, ‘that Frank has carried the empire of Cupid further than most men. When I was in Lincolnshire so many years ago he attended me thither; and when we returned home together, I found that a female haymaker had followed him to London for love.’ If this story is generally true, it bears the mark of Mrs. Piozzi’s usual inaccuracy. The visit was paid early in the year, and was over in February; what haymakers were there at that season?</p>
		<p>[1392] Boswell by his quotation marks refers, I think, to his <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 24, 1773, where Johnson says:⁠—‘Nobody, at times, talks more laxly than I do.’ See also <i>post</i>, ii. 73.</p>
		<p>[1393] See <i>post</i>, April 26, 1776, for old Mr. Langton’s slowness of understanding.</p>
		<p>[1394] See <i>ante</i>, i. 320.</p>
		<p>[1395] Mr. Best (<i>Memorials</i>, p. 65) thus writes of a visit to Langton:⁠—‘We walked to the top of a very steep hill behind the house. Langton said, “Poor dear Dr. Johnson, when he came to this spot, turned back to look down the hill, and said he was determined to take a roll down. When we understood what he meant to do, we endeavoured to dissuade him; but he was resolute, saying, he had not had a roll for a long time; and taking out of his lesser pockets whatever might be in them, and laying himself parallel with the edge of the hill, he actually descended, turning himself over and over till he came to the bottom.” This story was told with such gravity, and with an air of such affectionate remembrance of a departed friend, that it was impossible to suppose this extraordinary freak an invention of Mr. Langton.’ It must have been in the winter that he had this roll.</p>
		<p>[1396] Boswell himself so calls it in a Mr. letter to Temple written three or four months after Garrick’s death, <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 242. See also Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 25, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1397] Malone says:⁠—‘Reynolds was the original founder of our Literary Club about the year 1762, the first thought of which he started to Dr. Johnson at his own fireside.’ Prior’s <i>Malone</i>, p. 434. Mrs. Piozzi (<i>Anec</i>. p. 122) says:⁠—‘Johnson called Reynolds their Romulus, or said somebody else of the company called him so, which was more likely.’ According to Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 425) the Club was founded in the winter of 1763, i.e. 1763⁠–⁠4.</p>
		<p>[1398] Dr. Nugent, a physician, was Burke’s father-in-law. Macaulay (<i>Essays</i>, i. 407) says:⁠—‘As we close Boswell’s book, the club-room is before us, and the table on which stands the omelet for Nugent, and the lemons for Johnson.’ It was from Mrs. Piozzi that Macaulay learnt of the omelet. Nugent was a Roman Catholic, and it was on Friday that the Club before long came to meet. We may assume that he would not on that day eat meat. ‘I fancy,’ Mrs. Piozzi writes (<i>Anec</i>. p. 122), ‘Dr. Nugent ordered an omelet sometimes on a Friday or Saturday night; for I remember Mr. Johnson felt very painful sensations at the sight of that dish soon after his death, and cried:⁠—“Ah my poor dear friend! I shall never eat omelet with <i>thee</i> again!” quite in an agony.’ Dr. Nugent, in the imaginary college at St. Andrews, was to be the professor of physic. Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Aug. 25, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1399] Mr. Andrew Chamier was of Huguenot descent, and had been a stock-broker. He was a man of liberal education. ‘He acquired such a fortune as enabled him, though young, to quit business, and become, what indeed he seemed by nature intended for, a gentleman.’ Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 422. In 1764 he was Secretary in the War Office. In 1775 he was appointed Under Secretary of State. Forster’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 310. He was to be the professor of commercial politics in the imaginary college. Johnson passed one of his birth-days at his house; <i>post</i>, under Sept. 9, 1779, note.</p>
		<p>[1400] ‘It was Johnson’s intention,’ writes Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 423), ‘that their number should not exceed nine.’ Nine was the number of the Ivy Lane Club (<i>ante</i>, p. 190). Johnson, I suppose, looked upon nine as the most <i>clubable</i> number. ‘It was intended,’ says Dr. Percy, ‘that if only two of these chanced to meet for the evening, they should be able to entertain each other.’ Goldsmith’s <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 70. Hawkins adds that ‘Mr. Dyer (<i>post</i>, 1780 in Mr. Langton’s <i>Collection</i>), a member of the Ivy Lane Club, who for some years had been abroad, made his appearance among us, and was cordially received.’ According to Dr. Percy, by 1768 not only had Hawkins formally withdrawn, but Beauclerk had forsaken the club for more fashionable ones. ‘Upon this the Club agreed to increase their number to twelve; every new member was to be elected by ballot, and one black ball was sufficient for exclusion. Mr. Beauclerk then desired to be restored to the Society, and the following new members were introduced on Monday, Feb. 15, 1768; Sir R. Chambers, Dr. Percy and Mr. Colman.’ Goldsmith’s <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 72. In the list in Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, ed. 1844, ii. 326, the election of Percy and Chambers is placed in 1765.</p>
		<p>[1401] Boswell wrote on April 4, 1775:⁠—‘I dine, Friday, at the Turk’s Head, Gerrard-street, with our Club, Sir Joshua Reynolds, etc., who now dine once a month, and sup every Friday.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 186. In 1766, Monday was the night of meeting. <i>Post</i>, May 10, 1766. In Dec. 1772 the night was changed to Friday. Goldsmith’s <i>Misc. Works</i>, i. 72. Hawkins says (<i>Life</i>, pp. 424, 5):⁠—‘We seldom got together till nine; preparing supper took up till ten; and by the time that the table was cleared, it was near eleven. Our evening toast was the motto of Padre Paolo, <i>Esto perpetua! Esto perpetua</i> was being soon not Padre Paolo’s motto, but his dying prayer. ‘As his end evidently approached, the brethren of the convent came to pronounce the last prayers, with which he could only join in his thoughts, being able to pronounce no more than these words, “<i>Esto perpetua</i>” mayst thou last for ever; which was understood to be a prayer for the prosperity of his country.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, vi. 269.</p>
		<p>[1402] See <i>post</i>, March 14, 1777.</p>
		<p>[1403] ‘After 1783 it removed to Prince’s in Sackville-street, and on his house being soon afterwards shut up, it removed to Baxter’s, which subsequently became Thomas’s, in Dover-street. In January 1792 it removed to Parsloe’s, in St. James’s-street; and on February 26, 1799, to the Thatched-house in the same street.’ Forster’s <i>Goldsmith</i> i. 311.</p>
		<p>[1404] The second edition is here spoken of. MALONE.</p>
		<p>[1405] <i>Life of Johnson</i>, p. 425. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1406] From Sir Joshua Reynolds. BOSWELL. The Knight having refused to pay his portion of the reckoning for supper, because he usually eat no supper at home, Johnson observed, ‘Sir John, Sir, is a very <i>unclubable</i> man.’ BURNEY. Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 231) says that ‘Mr. Dyer had contracted a fatal intimacy with some persons of desperate fortunes, who were dealers in India stock, at a time when the affairs of the company were in a state of fluctuation.’ Malone, commenting on this passage, says that ‘under these words Mr. Burke is darkly alluded to, together with his cousin.’ He adds that the character given of Dyer by Hawkins ‘is discoloured by the malignant prejudices of that shallow writer, who, having quarrelled with Mr. Burke, carried his enmity even to Mr. Burke’s friends.’ Prior’s <i>Malone</i>, p. 419. See also <i>ante</i>, p. 27. Hawkins (<i>Life</i>, p. 420) said of Goldsmith:⁠—‘As he wrote for the booksellers, we at the Club looked on him as a mere literary drudge, equal to the task of compiling and translating, but little capable of original, and still less of poetical composition.’</p>
		<p>[1407] <i>Life of Johnson</i>, p. 425. BOSWELL. Hawkins is ‘equally inaccurate’ in saying’ that Johnson was so constant at our meetings as never to absent himself.’ (<i>Ib</i>. p. 424.) See <i>post</i>, Johnson’s letter to Langton of March 9, 1766, where he says:⁠—‘Dyer is constant at the Club; Hawkins is remiss; I am not over diligent.’</p>
		<p>[1408] Letters to and from Dr. Johnson. Vol. ii. p. 278 [387]. BOSWELL. The passage is as follows:⁠—‘ “If he <i>does</i> apply,” says our Doctor to Mr. Thrale, “I’ll black-ball him.” “Who, Sir? Mr. Garrick, your friend, your companion⁠—black-ball him!” “Why, Sir, I love my little David dearly, better than all or any of his flatterers do, but surely one ought, <abbr>etc.</abbr>” ’</p>
		<p>[1409] Pope’s <i>Moral Essays</i>, iii. 242.</p>
		<p>[1410] Malone says that it was from him that Boswell had his account of Garrick’s election, and that he had it from Reynolds. He adds that ‘Johnson warmly supported Garrick, being in reality a very tender affectionate man. He was merely offended at the actors conceit.’ He continues:⁠—‘On the former part of this story it probably was that Hawkins grounded his account that Garrick never was of the Club, and that Johnson said he never ought to be of it. And thus it is that this stupid biographer, and the more flippant and malicious Mrs. Piozzi have miscoloured and misrepresented almost every anecdote that they have pretented to tell of Dr. Johnson.’ Prior’s <i>Malone</i>, p. 392. Whatever was the slight cast upon Garrick, he was nevertheless the sixth new member elected. Four, as I have shown, were added by 1768. The next elections were in 1773 (Croker’s <i>Boswell</i>, ed. 1844. ii. 326), when five were added, of whom Garrick was the second, and Boswell the fifth. In 1774 five more were elected, among whom were Fox and Gibbon. Hannah More (<i>Memoirs</i>, i. 249) says that ‘upon Garrick’s death, when numberless applications were made to succeed him [in the Club], Johnson was deaf to them all. He said, “No, there never could be found any successor worthy of such a man;” and he insisted upon it there should be a year’s widowhood in the club, before they thought of a new election.’</p>
		<p>[1411] Grainger wrote to Percy on April 6, 1764:⁠—‘Sam. Johnson says he will review it in <i>The Critical</i>‘ In August, 1765, he wrote:⁠—‘I am perfectly satisfied with the reception the <i>Sugar Cane</i> has met with, and am greatly obliged to you and Mr. Johnson for the generous care you took of it in my absence.’ Prior’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 238. He was absent in the West Indies. He died on Dec. 16, 1766. <i>Ib</i>. p. 241. The review of the <i>Sugar Cane</i> in the <i>Critical Review</i> (p. 270) is certainly by Johnson. The following passage is curious:⁠—‘The last book begins with a striking invocation to the genius of Africa, and goes on to give proper instructions for the buying and choice of negroes.⁠ ⁠… The poet talks of this ungenerous commerce without the least appearance of detestation; but proceeds to direct these purchasers of their fellow-creatures with the same indifference that a groom would give instructions for choosing a horse.</p>
		<p>‘Clear roll their ample eye; their tongue be red;<br/>
		 Broad swell their chest; their shoulders wide expand;<br/>
		 Not prominent their belly; clean and strong<br/>
		 Their thighs and legs in just proportion rise.’<br/></p>
		<p>See also <i>post</i>, March 21, 1776.</p>
		<p>[1412] Johnson thus ends his brief review:⁠—‘Such in the poem on which we now congratulate the public as on a production to which, since the death of Pope, it not be easy to find anything equal.’ <i>Critical Review</i>, p. 462.</p>
		<p>[1413] <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 50. BOSWELL. He adds:⁠—</p>
		<p>‘I hope<br/>
		 To put my rooms in order.<br/>
		 Disorder I have found one great cause of idleness.’<br/></p>
		<p>[1414] <i>Ib</i>. p. 51. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1415] It was on his birth-day that he said this. He wrote on the same day:⁠—‘I have outlived many friends. I have felt many sorrows. I have made few improvements.’</p>
		<p>[1416] <i>Prayers and Meditations</i>, p. 58. BOSWELL. In his <i>Vision of Theodore</i> (<i>Works</i>, ix. 174) he describes the state of mind which he has recorded in his Meditations:⁠—‘There were others whose crime it was rather to neglect Reason than to disobey her; and who retreated from the heat and tumult of the way, not to the bowers of Intemperance, but to the maze of Indolence. They had this peculiarity in their condition, that they were always in sight of the road of Reason, always wishing for her presence, and always resolving to return to-morrow.’</p>
		<p>[1417] See Appendix F.</p>
		<p>[1418] It used to be imagined at Mr. Thrale’s, when Johnson retired to a window or corner of the room, by perceiving his lips in motion, and hearing a murmur without audible articulation, that he was praying: but this was not <i>always</i> the case, for I was once, perhaps unperceived by him, writing at a table, so near the place of his retreat, that I heard him repeating some lines in an ode of Horace, over and over again, as if by iteration, to exercise the organs of speech, and fix the ode in his memory:</p>
		<p>Audiet cives acuisse ferrum<br/>
		 Quo graves Persas melius perirent,<br/>
		 Audiet pugnas.⁠ ⁠… <br/>
		 Odes, i. 2, 21.<br/>
		 [‘Our sons shall hear, shall hear to latest times,<br/>
		 Of Roman arms with civil gore imbrued,<br/>
		 Which better had the Persian foe subdued.’<br/>
		 <i>Francis</i>.]<br/></p>
		<p>It was during the American War. BURNEY. Boswell in his <i>Hebrides</i> (Oct. 12, 1773) records, ‘Dr. Johnson is often uttering pious ejaculations, when he appears to be talking to himself; for sometimes his voice grows stronger, and parts of the Lord’s Prayer are heard.’ In the same passage he describes other ‘particularities,’ and adds in a note:⁠—‘It is remarkable that Dr. Johnson should have read this account of some of his own peculiar habits, without saying anything on the subject, which I hoped he would have done.’ See <i>post</i>, Dec. 1784, note.</p>
		<p>[1419] Churchill’s <i>Poems</i>, i. 16. See <i>ante</i>, p. 391.</p>
		<p>[1420] ‘It is in vain to try to find a meaning in every one of his particularities, which, I suppose, are mere habits contracted by chance; of which every man has some that are more or less remarkable.’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 12, 1773. ‘The love of symmetry and order, which is natural to the mind of man, betrays him sometimes into very whimsical fancies. “This noble principle,” says a French author, “loves to amuse itself on the most trifling occasions. You may see a profound philosopher,” says he, “walk for an hour together in his chamber, and industriously treading at every step upon every other board in the flooring.” ’ <i>The Spectator</i>, No. 632.</p>
		<p>[1421] Mr. S. Whyte (<i>Miscellanea Nova</i>, p. 49) tells how from old Mr. Sheridan’s house in Bedford-street, opposite Henrietta-street, with an opera-glass he watched Johnson approaching. ‘I perceived him at a good distance working along with a peculiar solemnity of deportment, and an awkward sort of measured step. Upon every post as he passed along, he deliberately laid his hand; but missing one of them, when he had got at some distance he seemed suddenly to recollect himself, and immediately returning carefully performed the accustomed ceremony, and resumed his former course, not omitting one till he gained the crossing. This, Mr. Sheridan assured me, was his constant practice.’</p>
		<p>[1422] <i>Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>, 3rd edit. p. 316. BOSWELL. ‘The day that we left Talisker, he bade us ride on. He then turned the head of his horse back towards Talisker, stopped for some time; then wheeled round to the same direction with ours, and then came briskly after us.’ Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>‘, Oct. 12, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1423] Sir Joshua’s sister, for whom Johnson had a particular affection, and to whom he wrote many letters which I have seen, and which I am sorry her too nice delicacy will not permit to be published. BOSWELL. ‘Whilst the company at Mr. Thrale’s were speculating upon a microscope for the mind, Johnson exclaimed:⁠—“I never saw one that would bear it, except that of my dear Miss Reynolds, and hers is very near to purity itself.” ’ Northcote’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 80. Once, said Northcote, there was a coolness between her and her brother. She wished to set forth to him her grievances in a letter. Not finding it easy to write, she consulted Johnson, ‘who offered to write a letter himself, which when copied should pass as her own.’ This he did. It began: ‘I am well aware that complaints are always odious, but complain I must.’ Such a letter as this she saw would not pass with Sir Joshua as her own, and so she could not use it. <i>Ib</i>. p. 203. Of Johnson’s letters to her Malone published one, and Mr. Croker several more. Mme. D’Arblay, in the character she draws of her (<i>Memoirs of Dr. Burney</i>, i. 332), says that ‘Dr. Johnson tried in vain to cure her of living in an habitual perplexity of mind and irresolution of conduct, which to herself was restlessly tormenting, and to all around her was teazingly wearisome.’</p>
		<p>[1424] See Appendix C.</p>
		<p>[1425] <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 61. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1426] See <i>ante</i>, p. 346.</p>
		<p>[1427] His quarter’s pension. See <i>ante</i>, P. 376.</p>
		<p>[1428] Mr. Croker, misunderstanding a passage in Hawkins, writes:⁠—‘Hawkins says that he disliked to be called Doctor, as reminding him that he had been a schoolmaster.’ What Hawkins really says (<i>Life</i>, p. 446) is this:⁠—‘His attachment to Oxford prevented Johnson from receiving this honour as it was intended, and he never assumed the title which it conferred. He was as little pleased to be called Doctor in consequence of it, as he was with the title of <i>Domine</i>, which a friend of his once incautiously addressed him by. He thought it alluded to his having been a schoolmaster.’ It is clear that ‘it’ in the last line refers only to the title of <i>Domine</i>. Murphy (<i>Life</i>, p. 98) says that Johnson never assumed the title of Doctor, till Oxford conferred on him the degree. Boswell states (<i>post</i>, March 31, 1775, note):⁠—‘It is remarkable that he never, so far as I know, assumed his title of <i>Doctor</i>, but called himself <i>Mr</i>. Johnson.’ In this, as I show there, Boswell seems to be not perfectly accurate. I do not believe Hawkins’s assertion that Johnson ‘was little pleased to be called Doctor in consequence of his Dublin degree.’ In Boswell’s Hebrides, most of which was read by him before he received his Oxford degree, he is commonly styled Doctor. Boswell says in a note on Aug. 15, 1773:⁠—‘It was some time before I could bring myself to call him Doctor.’ Had Johnson disliked the title it would have been known to Boswell. Mrs. Thrale, it is true, in her letters’ to him, after he had received both his degrees, commonly speaks of him as Mr. Johnson. We may assume that he valued his Oxford degree of M.A. more highly than the Dublin degree of LL.D.; for in the third edition of the <i>Abridgment of his Dictionary</i>, published in 1766, he is styled Samuel Johnson, A.M. In his <i>Lives of the Poets</i> he calls himself simply Samuel Johnson. He had by that time risen above degrees. In his <i>Journey to the Hebrides</i> (<i>Works</i>, ix. 14), after stating that ‘An English or Irish doctorate cannot be obtained by a very young man,’ he continues:⁠—‘It is reasonable to suppose⁠ ⁠… that he who is by age qualified to be a doctor, has in so much time gained learning sufficient not to disgrace the title, or wit sufficient not to desire it.’</p>
		<p>[1429] Trinity College made him, it should seem, <i>Armiger</i> at the same time that it made him Doctor of Laws.</p>
		<p>[1430] See Appendix D for this letter.</p>
		<p>[1431] <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 66. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1432] <i>Single-speech</i> Hamilton, as he was commonly called, though in the House of Commons he had spoken more than once. For above thirty sessions together, however, he held his tongue. Prior’s <i>Burke</i>, p. 67.</p>
		<p>[1433] See Appendix E for an explanation.</p>
		<p>[1434] <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 67 BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1435] See Appendix F.</p>
		<p>[1436] Mr. Blakeway, in a note on this passage, says:⁠—‘The predecessor of old Thrale was Edmund Halsey, Esq.; the nobleman who married his daughter was Lord Cobham. The family of Thrale was of some consideration in St. Albans; in the Abbey-church is a handsome monument to the memory of Mr. John Thrale, late of London, merchant, who died in 1704.’ He describes the arms on the monument. Mr. Hayward, in <i>Mrs. Piozzis Autobiography</i>, i. 9, quotes her marginal note on this page in Boswell. She says that Edmund Halsey, son of a miller at St. Albans, married the only daughter of his master, old Child, of the Anchor Brewhouse, Southwark, and succeeded to the business upon Child’s death. ‘He sent for one of his sister’s sons to London (my Mr. Thrale’s father); said he would make a man of him, and did so; but made him work very hard, and treated him very roughly.’ He left him nothing at his death, and Thrale bought the brewery of Lord and Lady Cobham.</p>
		<p>[1437] See <i>post</i>, under April 4, 1781, and June 16, 1781.</p>
		<p>[1438] Mrs. Burney informs me that she heard Dr. Johnson say, ‘An English Merchant is a new species of Gentleman.’ He, perhaps, had in his mind the following ingenious passage in <i>The Conscious Lovers</i>, act iv. scene ii, where Mr. Sealand thus addresses Sir John Bevil: ‘Give me leave to say, that we merchants are a species of gentry that have grown into the world this last century, and are as honourable, and almost as useful as you landed-folks, that have always thought yourselves so much above us; for your trading forsooth is extended no farther than a load of hay, or a fat ox.⁠—You are pleasant people indeed! because you are generally bred up to be lazy, therefore, I warrant your industry is dishonourable.’ BOSWELL.</p>
		<p><i>The Conscious Lovers</i> is by Steele. ‘I never heard of any plays fit for a Christian to read,’ said Parson Adams, ‘but <i>Cato</i> and <i>The Conscious Lovers</i>; and I must own, in the latter there are some things almost solemn enough for a sermon.’ <i>Joseph Andrews</i>, Book III, chap. xi.</p>
		<p>[1439] In the first number of <i>The Hypochondriack</i> Boswell writes:⁠—‘It is a saying in feudal treatises, “Semel Baro semper Baro_,” “Once a baron always a baron.” ’ <i>London Mag</i>. 1777, p. 493. He seems of Mr. Thrale’s inferiority by speaking of him as Thrale and his house as Thrale’s. See <i>post</i>, April 5 and 12, 1776, April 7, 1778, and under March 30, 1783. He never, I believe, is thus familiar in the case of Beauclerk, Burke, Langton, and Reynolds.</p>
		<p>[1440] For her extraction see Hayward’s <i>Mrs. Piozzi</i>, i. 238.</p>
		<p>[1441] Miss Burney records in May 1779, how one day at Streatham ‘Mr. Murphy met with a very joyful reception; and Mr. Thrale, for the first time in his life, said he was “a good fellow;” for he makes it a sort of rule to salute him with the title of “scoundrel,” or “rascal.” They are very old friends; and I question if Mr. Thrale loves any man so well.’ Mme. D’Arblay’s <i>Diary</i>, i. 210.</p>
		<p>[1442] From the <i>Garrick Corres</i>, i. 116, it seems that Murphy introduced Garrick to the Thrales. He wrote to him on May 13, 1760:⁠—‘You stand engaged to Mr. Thrale for Wednesday night. You need not apprehend drinking; it is a very easy house.’</p>
		<p>[1443] Murphy (<i>Life</i>, p. 98) says that Johnson’s introduction to the Thrales ‘contributed more than anything else to exempt him from the solicitudes of life.’ He continues that ‘he looks back to the share he had in that business with self congratulation, since he knows the tenderness which from that time soothed Johnson’s cares at Streatham, and prolonged a valuable life.’ Johnson wrote to Mrs. Thrale from Lichfield on July 20, 1767:⁠—‘I have found nothing that withdraws my affections from the friends whom I left behind, or which makes me less desirous of reposing at that place which your kindness and Mr. Thrale’s allows me to call my <i>home</i>.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 4. From Mull, on Oct. 15, 1773, he wrote:⁠—‘Having for many weeks had no letter, my longings are very great to be informed how all things are at home, as you and mistress allow me to call it.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 166. Miss Burney in 1778 wrote that ‘though Dr. Johnson lives almost wholly at Streatham, he always keeps his apartments in town.’ Mme. D’Arblay’s <i>Diary</i>, i. 58. Johnson (<i>Works</i>, viii. 381) tells how, in the house of Sir Thomas Abney, ‘Dr. Watts, with a constancy of friendship and uniformity of conduct not often to be found, was treated for thirty-six years with all the kindness that friendship could prompt, and all the attention that respect could dictate.’ He continues:⁠—‘A coalition like this, a state in which the notions of patronage and dependence were overpowered by the perception of reciprocal benefits, deserves a particular memorial.’ It was such a coalition which he formed with the Thrales⁠—a coalition in which, though the benefits which he received were great, yet those which he conferred were still greater.</p>
		<p>[1444] On this Mrs. Piozzi notes:⁠—‘No, no! Mr. Thrale’s manners presented the character of a gay man of the town; like Millamant, in Congreve’s comedy, he abhorred the country and everything in it.’ Hayward’s <i>Piozzi</i>, i. 10. Mrs. Millamant, in <i>The Way of the World</i>, act iv. sc. iv., says:⁠—‘I loathe the country and everything that relates to it.’</p>
		<p>[1445] ‘It is but justice to Mr. Thrale to say, that a more ingenuous frame of mind no man possessed. His education at Oxford gave him the habits of a gentleman; his amiable temper recommended his conversation, and the goodness of his heart made him a sincere friend.’ Murphy’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 99. Johnson wrote of him to Mrs. Thrale:⁠—‘He must keep well, for he is the pillar of the house; and you must get well, or the house will hardly be worth propping.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 340. See <i>post</i>, April 18, 1778. Mme. D’Arblay (<i>Memoirs of Dr. Burney</i>, ii. 104) gives one reason for Thrale’s fondness for Johnson’s society. ‘Though entirely a man of peace, and a gentleman in his character, he had a singular amusement in hearing, instigating, and provoking a war of words, alternating triumph and overthrow, between clever and ambitious colloquial combatants, where there was nothing that could inflict disgrace upon defeat.’</p>
		<p>[1446] In like manner he called Mr. Thrale <i>Master</i> or <i>My master</i>. ‘I hope Master’s walk will be finished when I come back.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, i. 355. ‘My master may plant and dig till his pond is an ocean.’ <i>Ib</i>. p. 357. See <i>post</i>, July 9, 1777.</p>
		<p>[1447] Miss Burney thus described her in 1776:⁠—‘She is extremely lively and chatty; and showed none of the supercilious or pedantic airs so scoffingly attributed to women of learning or celebrity; on the contrary, she is full of sport, remarkably gay, and excessively agreeable. I liked her in everything except her entrance into the room, which was rather florid and flourishing, as who should say, “It is I!⁠—No less a person than Mrs. Thrale!” However, all that ostentation wore out in the course of the visit, which lasted the whole morning; and you could not have helped liking her, she is so very entertaining⁠—though not simple enough, I believe, for quite winning your heart.’ <i>Memoirs of Dr. Burney</i>, ii. 88.</p>
		<p>[1448] <i>Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes</i>, p. 279. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1449] Johnson wrote to Mrs. Thrale on Oct. 13, 1777:⁠—‘I cannot but think on your kindness and my master’s. Life has upon the whole fallen short, very short, of my early expectation; but the acquisition of such a friendship, at an age when new friendships are seldom acquired, is something better than the general course of things gives man a right to expect. I think on it with great delight; I am not very apt to be delighted.’ <i>Piozzi Letters</i>, ii. 7. Johnson’s friends suffered from this connection. See <i>post</i>, March 20, 1778, where it is said that ‘at Streatham he was in a great measure absorbed from the society of his old friends.’</p>
		<p>[1450] Yet one year he recorded:⁠—‘March 3, I have never, I thank God, since new year’s day deviated from the practice of rising. In this practice I persisted till I went to Mr. Thrale’s sometime before Midsummer; the irregularity of that family broke my habit of rising. I was there till after Michaelmas.’ Hawkins’s <i>Johnson</i>, p. 458, note. Hawkins places this in 1765; but Johnson states (<i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 71), ‘I returned from Streatham, Oct. 1⁠—66, having lived there more than three months.’</p>
		<p>[1451] Boswell wrote to Temple in 1775:⁠—‘I am at present in a <i>tourbillon</i> of conversations; but how come you to throw in the Thrales among the Reynoldses and the Beauclerks? Mr. Thrale is a worthy, sensible man, and has the wits much about his house; but he is not one himself. Perhaps you mean Mrs. Thrale.’ <i>Letters of Boswell</i>, p. 192. Murphy (<i>Life</i>, p. 141) says:⁠—‘It was late in life before Johnson had the habit of mixing, otherwise than occasionally, with polite company. At Mr. Thrale’s he saw a constant succession of well-accomplished visitors. In that society he began to wear off the rugged points of his own character. The time was then expected when he was to cease being what George Garrick, brother to the celebrated actor, called him the first time he heard him converse. “A TREMENDOUS COMPANION” ’</p>
		<p>[1452] Johnson wrote to Dr. Warton on Oct. 9:⁠—‘Mrs. Warton uses me hardly in supposing that I could forget so much kindness and civility as she showed me at Winchester.’ Wooll’s <i>Warton</i>, p. 309. Malone on this remarks:⁠—‘It appears that Johnson spent some time with that gentleman at Winchester in this year.’ I believe that Johnson is speaking of the year 1762, when, on his way to Devonshire, he passed two nights in that town. See Taylor’s <i>Reynolds</i>, i. 214.</p>
		<p>[1453] It was in 1745 that he published his <i>Observations on Macbeth</i>, as a specimen of his projected edition (<i>ante</i>, p. 175). In 1756 he issued <i>Proposals</i> undertaking that his work should be published before Christmas, 1757 (p. 318). On June 21, 1757, he writes:⁠—‘I am printing my new edition of <i>Shakspeare</i>‘ (p. 322). On Dec. 24 of the same year he says, ‘I shall publish about March’ (p. 323). On March 8, 1758, he writes:⁠—‘It will be published before summer.⁠ ⁠… I have printed many of the plays’ (p. 327). In June of the same year Langton took some of the plays to Oxford (p. 336). Churchill’s <i>Ghost</i> (Parts 1 and 2) was published in the spring of 1762 (p. 319). On July 20, 1762, Johnson wrote to Baretti, ‘I intend that you shall soon receive Shakspeare’ (p. 369). In October 1765 it was published.</p>
		<p>[1454] According to Mr. Seward (<i>Anec</i>. ii. 464), ‘Adam Smith styled it the most manly piece of criticism that was ever published in any country.’</p>
		<p>[1455] George III, at all events, did not share in this blind admiration. ‘Was there ever,’ cried he, ‘such stuff as great part of Shakespeare? only one must not say so. But what think you? What? Is there not sad stuff? What? What?’ ‘Yes, indeed, I think so, Sir, though mixed with such excellencies that⁠—’ ‘O!’ cried he, laughing good-humouredly, ‘I know it is not to be said! but it’s true. Only it’s Shakespeare, and nobody dare abuse him.’ Mme. D’Arblay’s <i>Diary</i>, ii, 398.</p>
		<p>[1456] That Johnson did not slur his work, as has been often said, we have the best of all evidence⁠—his own word. ‘I have, indeed,’ he writes (<i>Works</i>, v. 152), ‘disappointed no opinion more than my own; yet I have endeavoured to perform my task with no slight solicitude. Not a single passage in the whole work has appeared to me corrupt which I have not attempted to restore; or obscure which I have not attempted to illustrate.’</p>
		<p>[1457] Steevens wrote to Garrick:⁠—‘To say the truth, the errors of Warburton and Johnson are often more meritorious than such corrections of them as the obscure industry of Mr. Farmer and myself can furnish. Disdaining crutches, they have sometimes had a fall; but it is my duty to remember, that I, for my part, could not have kept on my legs at all without them.’ <i>Garrick Corres</i>. ii, 130. ‘Johnson’s preface and notes are distinguished by clearness of thought and diction, and by masterly common sense.’ <i>Cambridge Shakespeare</i>, i. xxxvi.</p>
		<p>[1458] Kenrick later on was the gross libeller of Goldsmith, and the far grosser libeller of Garrick. ‘When proceedings were commenced against him in the Court of King’s Bench [for the libel on Garrick], he made at once the most abject submission and retractation.’ Prior’s <i>Goldsmith</i>, i. 294. In the <i>Garrick Carres</i>, (ii. 341) is a letter addressed to Kenrick, in which Garrick says:⁠—‘I could have honoured you by giving the satisfaction of a gentleman, <i>if you could</i> (as Shakespeare says) <i>have screwed your courage to the sticking place</i>, to have taken it.’ It is endorsed:⁠—‘This was not sent to the scoundrel Dr. Kenrick.⁠ ⁠… It was judged best not to answer any more of Dr. Kenrick’s notes, he had behaved so unworthily.’</p>
		<p>[1459] Ephraim Chambers, in the epitaph that he made for himself (<i>ante</i>, p. 219), had described himself as <i>multis pervulgatus paucis notus</i>.’ <i>Gent. Mag</i>. x. 262.</p>
		<p>[1460] See Boswell’s <i>Hebrides</i>, Oct. 1, 1773.</p>
		<p>[1461] Johnson had joined Voltaire with Dennis and Rymer. ‘Dennis and Rymer think Shakespeare’s Romans not sufficiently Roman; and Voltaire censures his kings as not completely royal. Dennis is offended that Menenius, a senator of Rome, should play the buffoon; and Voltaire, perhaps, thinks decency violated when the Danish usurper is represented as a drunkard. But Shakespeare always makes nature predominate over accident.⁠ ⁠… His story requires Romans or kings, but he thinks only on men. He knew that Rome, like every other city, had men of all dispositions; and wanting a buffoon, he went into the senate-house for that which the senate-house would certainly have afforded him. He was inclined to show an usurper and a murderer, not only odious, but despicable; he therefore added drunkenness to his other qualities, knowing that kings love wine like other men, and that wine exerts its natural power upon kings. These are the petty cavils of petty <i>minds</i>; a poet overlooks the casual distinction of country and condition, as a painter, satisfied with the figure, neglects the drapery.’ Johnson’s <i>Works</i>, v. 109. Johnson had previously attacked Voltaire, in his <i>Memoirs of Frederick the Great</i>. (<i>Ante</i>, i. 435, note 2.) In these <i>Memoirs</i> he writes:⁠—‘Voltaire has asserted that a large sum was raised for her [the Queen of Hungary’s] succour by voluntary subscriptions of the English ladies. It is the great failing of a strong imagination to catch greedily at wonders. He was misinformed, and was perhaps unwilling to learn, by a second enquiry, a truth less splendid and amusing.’ <i>Ib</i>. vi. 455. See <i>post</i>, Oct. 27, 1779.</p>
		<p>[1462] ‘Voltaire replied in the <i>Dictionnaire Philosophique</i>. (<i>Works</i>, xxxiii. 566.) ‘J’ai jeté les yeux sur une édition de Shakespeare, donnée par le sieur Samuel Johnson. J’y ai vu qu’on y traite de <i>petits esprits</i> les étrangers qui sont étonnés que dans les pièces de ce grand Shakespeare <i>un sénateur romain fasse le bouffon; et gu’un roi paraisse sur le théâtre en ivrogne</i>. Je ne veux point soupçonner le sieur Johnson d’ètre un mauvais plaisant, et d’aimer trop le vin; mais je trouve un peu extraordinaire qu’il compte la bouffonnerie et l’ivrognerie parmi les beautes du théatre tragique; la raison qu’il en donne n’est pas moins singulière. <i>Le poète</i>, dit-il, <i>dédaigne ces distinctions accidentelles de conditions et de pays, comme un peintre qui, content d’avoir peint la figure, néglige la draperie</i>. La comparaison serait plus juste, s’il parlait d’un peintre qui, dans un sujet noble, introduirait des grotesques ridicules, peindrait dans la bataille d’Arbelles Alexandre-le Grand monte sur un âne, et la femme de Darius buvant avec des goujats dans un cabaret.’ Johnson, perhaps, had this attack in mind when, in his <i>Life of Pope</i> (<i>Works</i>, viii. 275), he thus wrote of Voltaire:⁠—‘He had been entertained by Pope at his table, when he talked with so much grossness, that Mrs. Pope was driven from the room. Pope discovered by a trick that he was a spy for the court, and never considered him as a man worthy of confidence.’</p>
		<p>[1463] See <i>post</i>, under May 8, 1781.</p>
		<p>[1464] See <i>post</i>, ii. 74.</p>
		<p>[1465] He was probably proposing to himself the model of this excellent person, who for his piety was named <i>the Seraphic Doctor</i>. BOSWELL.</p>
		<p>[1466]</p>
		<p>’E’en in a bishop I can spy desert,<br/>
		Secker is decent, Rundel has a heart.’<br/></p>
		<p>Pope. <i>Epil, Sat</i>. II. 70.</p>
		<p>[1467] So Smollett calls him in his <i>History of England</i>, iii. 16.</p>
		<p>[1468] Six of these twelve guineas Johnson appears to have borrowed from Mr. Allen, the printer. See Hawkins’s <i>Life of Johnson</i>, p. 366 n. MALONE.</p>
		<p>[1469] Written by mistake for 1759. On the <i>outside</i> of the letter of the 13th was written by another hand⁠—‘Pray acknowledge the receipt of this by return of post, without fail.’ MALONE.</p>
		<p>[1470] Catherine Chambers, Mrs. Johnson’s maid-servant. She died in October, 1767. MALONE. See <i>post</i>, ii. 43.</p>
		<p>[1471] This letter was written on the second leaf of the preceding, addressed to Miss Porter. MALONE.</p>
		<p>[1472] Mrs. Johnson probably died on the 20th or 21st January, and was buried on the day this letter was written. MALONE. On the day on which his mother was buried Johnson composed a prayer, as being ‘now about to return to the common comforts and business of the world.’ <i>Pr. and Med</i>. p. 38. After his wife”s death he had allowed forty days to pass before his ‘return to life.’ See <i>ante</i>, p. 234, note 2.</p>
		<p>[1473] See <i>ante</i>, p. 80.</p>
		<p>[1474] Barnaby Greene had just published <i>The Laureat, a Poem</i>, in which Johnson is abused. It is in the February list of books in the <i>Gent. Mag</i>. for 1765.</p>
		<p>[1475] Sir Cloudesly Shovel’s monument is thus mentioned by Addison in <i>The Spectator</i>, No. 26:⁠—‘It has very often given me great offence; instead of the brave rough English Admiral, which was the distinguishing character of that plain gallant man, he is represented on his tomb by the figure of a beau, dressed in a long periwig, and reposing himself upon velvet cushions under a canopy of state.’</p>
		<p>[1476]</p>
		<p>‘That live-long wig, which Gorgon’s self might own,<br/>
		Eternal buckle takes in Parian stone.’<br/></p>
		<p>Pope’s <i>Moral Essays</i>, iii. 295.</p>
		<p>[1477] Milton’s Epigram is in his <i>Sylvarum Liber</i>, and is entitled <i>In Effigiei ejus Sculptorem</i>.</p>
		<p>[1478] Johnson’s acquaintance, Bishop Newton (<i>post</i>, June 3, 1784), published an edition of <i>Milton</i>.</p>
		<p>[1479] It was no doubt by the Master of Emanuel College, his friend Dr. Farmer (<i>ante</i>, p. 368), that Johnson was promised ‘an habitation’ there.</p>
	</body>
</html>
