<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Part III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Part</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Life of Samuel Johnson (1776⁠–⁠1780)</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p id="III-page-1">Having left Ashbourne in the evening, we stopped to change horses at Derby, and availed ourselves of a moment to enjoy the conversation of my countryman, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Butter, then physician there. He was in great indignation because Lord Mountstuart’s bill for a Scotch militia<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2861" id="noteref-2861" epub:type="noteref">2861</a> had been lost. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson was as violent against it. “I am glad, (said he,) that Parliament has had the spirit to throw it out. You wanted to take advantage of the timidity of our scoundrels;” (meaning, I suppose, the ministry). It may be observed, that he used the epithet scoundrel very commonly not quite in the sense in which it is generally understood, but as a strong term of disapprobation; as when he abruptly answered <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale, who had asked him how he did, “Ready to become a scoundrel, Madam; with a little more spoiling you will, I think, make me a complete rascal<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2862" id="noteref-2862" epub:type="noteref">2862</a>:” he meant, easy to become a capricious and self-indulgent valetudinarian; a character for which I have heard him express great disgust.</p>
			<p id="III-page-2">Johnson had with him upon this jaunt, “<i xml:lang="it">Il Palmerino d’Inghilterra</i>,” a romance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2863" id="noteref-2863" epub:type="noteref">2863</a> praised by Cervantes; but did not like it much. He said, he read it for the language, by way of preparation for his Italian expedition.⁠—We lay this night at Loughborough.</p>
			<p>On Thursday, March 28, we pursued our journey. I mentioned that old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheridan complained of the ingratitude of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wedderburne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2864" id="noteref-2864" epub:type="noteref">2864</a> and General Fraser, who had been much obliged to him when they were young Scotchmen entering upon life in England. JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, a man is very apt to complain of the ingratitude of those who have risen far above him. A man when he gets into a higher sphere, into other habits of life, cannot keep up all his former connections. Then, Sir, those who knew him formerly upon a level with themselves, may think that they ought still to be treated as on a level, which cannot be; and an acquaintance in a former situation may bring out things which it would be very disagreeable to have mentioned before higher company, though, perhaps, everybody knows of them.” He placed this subject in a new light to me, and showed that a man who has risen in the world, must not be condemned too harshly for being distant to former acquaintance, even though he may have been much obliged to them.” It is, no doubt, to be wished that a proper degree of attention should be shown by great men to their early friends. But if either from obtuse insensibility to difference of situation, or presumptuous forwardness, which will not submit even to an exteriour observance of it, the dignity of high place cannot be preserved, when they are admitted into the company of those raised above the state in which they once were, encroachment must be repelled, and the kinder feelings sacrificed. To one of the very fortunate persons whom I have mentioned, namely, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wedderburne, now Lord Loughborough, I must do the justice to relate, that I have been assured by another early acquaintance of his, old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Macklin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2865" id="noteref-2865" epub:type="noteref">2865</a> who assisted in improving his pronunciation, that he found him very grateful. Macklin, I suppose, had not pressed upon his elevation with so much <a id="III-page-3" />eagerness as the gentleman who complained of him. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s remark as to the jealousy “entertained of our friends who rise far above us,” is certainly very just. By this was withered the early friendship between Charles Townshend and Akenside;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2866" id="noteref-2866" epub:type="noteref">2866</a> and many similar instances might be adduced.</p>
			<p>He said, “It is commonly a weak man who marries for love.” We then talked of marrying women of fortune; and I mentioned a common remark, that a man may be, upon the whole, richer by marrying a woman with a very small portion, because a woman of fortune will be proportionally expensive; whereas a woman who brings none will be very moderate in expenses. JOHNSON. “Depend upon it, Sir, this is not true. A woman of fortune being used to the handling of money, spends it judiciously: but a woman who gets the command of money for the first time upon her marriage, has such a gust in spending it, that she throws it away with great profusion.”</p>
			<p>He praised the ladies of the present age, insisting that they were more faithful to their husbands, and more virtuous in every respect, than in former times, because their understandings were better cultivated.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2867" id="noteref-2867" epub:type="noteref">2867</a> It was an undoubted proof of his good sense and good disposition, that he was never querulous, never prone to inveigh against the present times, as is so common when superficial minds are on the fret. On the contrary, he was willing to speak favourably of his own age; and, indeed, maintained its superiority<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2868" id="noteref-2868" epub:type="noteref">2868</a> in every respect, except in its reverence for government; the relaxation of which he imputed, as its grand cause, to the shock which our monarchy received at the Revolution, though necessary;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2869" id="noteref-2869" epub:type="noteref">2869</a> and secondly, to the timid concessions made to faction by successive administrations in the reign of his present Majesty. I am happy to think, that he lived to see the Crown at last recover its just influence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2870" id="noteref-2870" epub:type="noteref">2870</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-4">At Leicester we read in the newspaper that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> James<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2871" id="noteref-2871" epub:type="noteref">2871</a> was dead. I thought that the death of an old schoolfellow, and one with whom he had lived a good deal in London, would have affected my fellow-traveller much: but he only said, “Ah! poor Jamy.” Afterwards, however, when we were in the chaise, he said, with more tenderness, “Since I set out on this jaunt, I have lost an old friend and a young one;⁠—<abbr>Dr.</abbr> James, and poor Harry.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2872" id="noteref-2872" epub:type="noteref">2872</a>” (Meaning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale’s son.)</p>
			<p>Having lain at <abbr>St.</abbr> Alban’s, on Thursday, March 28, we breakfasted the next morning at Barnet. I expressed to him a weakness of mind which I could not help; an uneasy apprehension that my wife and children, who were at a great distance from me, might, perhaps, be ill. “Sir, (said he,) consider how foolish you would think it in <em>them</em> to be apprehensive that <em>you</em> are ill.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2873" id="noteref-2873" epub:type="noteref">2873</a>” This sudden turn relieved me for the moment; but I afterwards perceived it to be an ingenious fallacy. I might, to be sure, be satisfied that they had no reason to be apprehensive about me, because I <em>knew</em> that I myself was well: but we might have a mutual anxiety, without the charge of folly; because each was, in some degree, uncertain as to the condition of the other.</p>
			<p id="III-page-5">I enjoyed the luxury of our approach to London, that metropolis which we both loved so much, for the high and varied intellectual pleasure which it furnishes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2874" id="noteref-2874" epub:type="noteref">2874</a> I experienced immediate happiness while whirled along with such a companion, and said to him, “Sir, you observed one day at General Oglethorpe’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2875" id="noteref-2875" epub:type="noteref">2875</a> that a man is never happy for the present, but when he is drunk. Will you not add⁠—or when driving rapidly in a post-chaise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2876" id="noteref-2876" epub:type="noteref">2876</a>?” JOHNSON. “No, Sir, you are driving rapidly from something, or to something.”</p>
			<p>Talking of melancholy, he said, “Some men, and very thinking men too, have not those vexing thoughts.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2877" id="noteref-2877" epub:type="noteref">2877</a> Sir Joshua Reynolds is the same all the year round.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2878" id="noteref-2878" epub:type="noteref">2878</a> Beauclerk, except when ill and in pain, is the same. But I believe most men have them in the degree in which they are capable of having them. If I were in the country, and were distressed by that malady, I would force myself to take a book; and every time I did it I should find it the easier. Melancholy, indeed, should be diverted by every means but drinking.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2879" id="noteref-2879" epub:type="noteref">2879</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-6">We stopped at Messieurs Dillys, booksellers in the Poultry; from whence he hurried away, in a hackney coach, to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale’s, in the Borough. I called at his house in the evening, having promised to acquaint <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams of his safe return; when, to my surprise, I found him sitting with her at tea, and, as I thought, not in a very good humour: for, it seems, when he had got to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale’s, he found the coach was at the door waiting to carry <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> and Miss Thrale, and Signor Baretti, their Italian master, to Bath.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2880" id="noteref-2880" epub:type="noteref">2880</a> This was not showing the attention which might have been expected to the “Guide, Philosopher, and Friend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2881" id="noteref-2881" epub:type="noteref">2881</a>” the <em>Imlac</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2882" id="noteref-2882" epub:type="noteref">2882</a> who had hastened from the country to console a distressed mother, who he understood was very anxious for his return. They had, I found, without ceremony, proceeded on their intended journey. I was glad to understand from him that it was still resolved that his tour to Italy with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale should take place, of which he had entertained some doubt, on account of the loss which they had suffered; and his doubts afterwards proved to be well-founded. He observed, indeed very justly, that “their loss was an additional reason for their going abroad; and if it had not been fixed that he should have been one of the party, he would force them out; but he would not advise them unless his advice was asked, lest they might suspect that he recommended what he wished on his own account.” I was not pleased that his intimacy <a id="III-page-7" />with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale’s family, though it no doubt contributed much to his comfort and enjoyment, was not without some degree of restraint: not, as has been grossly suggested, that it was required of him as a task to talk for the entertainment of them and their company; but that he was not quite at his ease; which, however, might partly be owing to his own honest pride⁠—that dignity of mind which is always jealous of appearing too compliant.</p>
			<p>On Sunday, March 31, I called on him, and showed him as a curiosity which I had discovered, his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Translation of Lobo’s Account of Abyssinia</i>, which Sir John Pringle had lent me, it being then little known as one of his works.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2883" id="noteref-2883" epub:type="noteref">2883</a> He said, “Take no notice of it,” or “don’t talk of it.” He seemed to think it beneath him, though done at six-and-twenty. I said to him, “Your style, Sir, is much improved since you translated this.” He answered with a sort of triumphant smile, “Sir, I hope it is.”</p>
			<p>On Wednesday, April 3, in the morning I found him very busy putting his books in order, and as they were generally very old ones, clouds of dust were flying around him. He had on a pair of large gloves such as hedgers use. His present appearance put me in mind of my uncle, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Boswell’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2884" id="noteref-2884" epub:type="noteref">2884</a> description of him, “A robust genius, born to grapple with whole libraries.”</p>
			<p>I gave him an account of a conversation which had passed between me and Captain Cook, the day before, at dinner at Sir John Pringle’s;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2885" id="noteref-2885" epub:type="noteref">2885</a> and he was much pleased with the conscientious accuracy of that celebrated circumnavigator, who set me right as to many of the exaggerated accounts given by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hawkesworth of his Voyages. I told him that while I was with the Captain, I catched the enthusiasm<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2886" id="noteref-2886" epub:type="noteref">2886</a> of curiosity and adventure, and felt a strong inclination to go with him on his next voyage. JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, a man <em>does</em> feel so, till he considers how very little he can learn from such voyages.” BOSWELL. “But one is carried away with the general grand and indistinct notion of A VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD.” <a id="III-page-8" />JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir, but a man is to guard himself against taking a thing in general.” I said I was certain that a great part of what we are told by the travellers to the South Sea must be conjecture, because they had not enough of the language of those countries to understand so much as they have related. Objects falling under the observation of the senses might be clearly known; but everything intellectual, everything abstract⁠—politics, morals, and religion, must be darkly guessed. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson was of the same opinion. He upon another occasion, when a friend mentioned to him several extraordinary facts, as communicated to him by the circumnavigators, slyly observed, “Sir, I never before knew how much I was respected by these gentlemen; they told <em>me</em> none of these things.”</p>
			<p>He had been in company with Omai, a native of one of the South Sea Islands, after he had been some time in this country. He was struck with the elegance of his behaviour, and accounted for it thus: “Sir, he had passed his time, while in England, only in the best company; so that all that he had acquired of our manners was genteel. As a proof of this, Sir, Lord Mulgrave and he dined one day at Streatham; they sat with their backs to the light fronting me, so that I could not see distinctly; and there was so little of the savage in Omai, that I was afraid to speak to either, lest I should mistake one for the other.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2887" id="noteref-2887" epub:type="noteref">2887</a>”</p>
			<p>We agreed to dine today at the Mitre-tavern, after the rising of the House of Lords, where a branch of the litigation concerning the Douglas Estate,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2888" id="noteref-2888" epub:type="noteref">2888</a> in which I was one of the counsel, was to come on. I brought with me <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murray, Solicitor-General of Scotland, now one of the Judges of the Court of Session, with the title of Lord Henderland. I mentioned <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Solicitor’s relation, Lord Charles Hay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2889" id="noteref-2889" epub:type="noteref">2889</a> with whom I knew <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson <a id="III-page-9" />had been acquainted. JOHNSON. “I wrote something<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2890" id="noteref-2890" epub:type="noteref">2890</a> for Lord Charles; and I thought he had nothing to fear from a court-martial. I suffered a great loss when he died; he was a mighty pleasing man in conversation, and a reading man. The character of a soldier is high. They who stand forth the foremost in danger, for the community, have the respect of mankind. An officer is much more respected than any other man who has as little money. In a commercial country, money will always purchase respect. But you find, an officer, who has, properly speaking, no money, is everywhere well received and treated with attention. The character of a soldier always stands him in stead.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2891" id="noteref-2891" epub:type="noteref">2891</a>” BOSWELL. “Yet, Sir, I think that common soldiers are worse thought of than other men in the same rank of life; such as labourers.” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, a common soldier is usually a very gross man,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2892" id="noteref-2892" epub:type="noteref">2892</a> and any quality which procures respect may be overwhelmed by grossness. A man of learning may be so vicious or so ridiculous that you cannot respect him. A common soldier too, generally eats more than he can pay for. But when a common soldier is civil in his quarters, his red coat procures him a degree of respect.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2893" id="noteref-2893" epub:type="noteref">2893</a>” The peculiar <a id="III-page-10" />respect paid to the military character in France was mentioned. BOSWELL. “I should think that where military men are so numerous, they would be less valued as not being rare.” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, wherever a particular character or profession is high in the estimation of a people, those who are of it will be valued above other men. We value an Englishman highly in this country, and yet Englishmen are not rare in it.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murray praised the ancient philosophers for the candour and good humour with which those of different sects disputed with each other. JOHNSON. “Sir, they disputed with good humour, because they were not in earnest as to religion. Had the ancients been serious in their belief, we should not have had their Gods exhibited in the manner we find them represented in the Poets. The people would not have suffered it. They disputed with good humour upon their fanciful theories, because they were not interested in the truth of them: when a man has nothing to lose, he may be in good humour with his opponent. Accordingly you see in Lucian, the Epicurean, who argues only negatively, keeps his temper; the Stoic, who has something positive to preserve, grows angry.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2894" id="noteref-2894" epub:type="noteref">2894</a> Being angry with one who controverts an opinion which you value, is a necessary consequence of the uneasiness which you feel. Every man who <a id="III-page-11" />attacks my belief, diminishes in some degree my confidence in it, and therefore makes me uneasy; and I am angry with him who makes me uneasy.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2895" id="noteref-2895" epub:type="noteref">2895</a> Those only who believed in revelation have been angry at having their faith called in question; because they only had something upon which they could rest as matter of fact.” MURRAY. “It seems to me that we are not angry at a man for controverting an opinion which we believe and value; we rather pity him.” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir; to be sure when you wish a man to have that belief which you think is of infinite advantage, you wish well to him; but your primary consideration is your own quiet. If a madman were to come into this room with a stick in his hand, no doubt we should pity the state of his mind; but our primary consideration would be to take care of ourselves. We should knock him down first, and pity him afterwards. No, Sir; every man will dispute with great good humour upon a subject in which he is not interested. I will dispute very calmly upon the probability of another man’s son being hanged; but if a man zealously enforces the probability that my own son will be hanged, I shall certainly not be in a very good humour with him.” I added this illustration, “If a man endeavours to convince me that my wife, whom I love very much, and in whom I place great confidence, is a disagreeable woman, and is even unfaithful to me, I shall be very angry, for he is putting me in fear of being unhappy.” MURRAY. “But, Sir, truth will always bear an examination.” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir, but it is painful to be forced to defend it. Consider, Sir, how should you like, though conscious of your innocence, to be tried before a jury for a capital crime, once a week.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-12">We talked of education at great schools; the advantages and disadvantages of which Johnson displayed in a luminous manner; but his arguments preponderated so much in favour of the benefit which a boy of good parts<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2896" id="noteref-2896" epub:type="noteref">2896</a> might receive at one of them, that I have reason to believe <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murray was very much influenced by what he had heard today, in his determination to send his own son to Westminster school.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2897" id="noteref-2897" epub:type="noteref">2897</a>⁠—I have acted in the same manner with regard to my own two sons; having placed the eldest at Eton, and the second at Westminster. I cannot say which is best.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2898" id="noteref-2898" epub:type="noteref">2898</a> But in justice to both those noble seminaries, I with high satisfaction declare, that my boys have derived from them a great deal of good, and no evil: and I trust they will, like Horace,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2899" id="noteref-2899" epub:type="noteref">2899</a> be grateful to their father for giving them so valuable an education.</p>
			<p id="III-page-13">I introduced the topic, which is often ignorantly urged, that the Universities of England are too rich;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2900" id="noteref-2900" epub:type="noteref">2900</a> so that learning does not flourish in them as it would do, if those who teach had smaller salaries, and depended on their assiduity for a great part of their income. JOHNSON. “Sir, the very reverse of this is the truth; the English Universities are not rich enough. Our fellowships are only sufficient to support a man during his studies to fit him for the world, and accordingly in general they are held no longer than till an opportunity offers of getting away. Now and then, perhaps, there is a fellow who grows old in his college; but this is against his will, unless he be a man very indolent indeed. A hundred a year is reckoned a good fellowship, and that is no more than is necessary to keep a man decently as a scholar. We do not allow our fellows to marry, because we consider academical institutions as preparatory to a settlement in the world. It is only by being employed as a tutor, that a fellow can obtain anything more than a livelihood. To be sure a man, who has enough without teaching, will probably not teach; for we would all be idle if we could.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2901" id="noteref-2901" epub:type="noteref">2901</a> In the same manner, a man who is to get nothing by teaching, will not exert himself. Gresham-College was intended as a place of instruction for London; able professors were to read lectures gratis, they contrived to have no scholars; whereas, if they had been allowed to receive but sixpence a lecture from each scholar, they would have been emulous to have had many scholars. Everybody will agree that it should be the interest of those who teach to have scholars; and this is the case in our Universities.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2902" id="noteref-2902" epub:type="noteref">2902</a> That they are too rich is certainly not true; <a id="III-page-14" />for they have nothing good enough to keep a man of eminent learning with them for his life. In the foreign Universities a professorship is a high thing. It is as much almost as a man can make by his learning; and therefore we find the most learned men abroad are in the Universities.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2903" id="noteref-2903" epub:type="noteref">2903</a> It is not so with us. Our Universities are impoverished of learning, by the penury of their provisions. I wish there were many places of a thousand a-year at Oxford, to keep first-rate men of learning from quitting the University.” Undoubtedly if this were the case, Literature would have a still greater dignity and splendour at Oxford, and there would be grander living sources of instruction.</p>
			<p id="III-page-15">I mentioned <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Maclaurin’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2904" id="noteref-2904" epub:type="noteref">2904</a> uneasiness on account of a degree of ridicule carelessly thrown on his deceased father, in Goldsmith’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Animated Nature</i>, in which that celebrated mathematician is represented as being subject to fits of yawning so violent as to render him incapable of proceeding in his lecture; a story altogether unfounded, but for the publication of which the law would give no reparation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2905" id="noteref-2905" epub:type="noteref">2905</a> This led us to agitate the question, whether legal redress could be obtained, even when a man’s deceased relation was calumniated in a publication. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murray maintained there should be reparation, unless the author could justify himself by proving the fact. JOHNSON. “Sir, it is of so much more consequence that truth should be told, than that individuals should not be made uneasy, that it is much better that the law does not restrain writing freely concerning the characters of the dead. Damages will be given to a man who is calumniated in his lifetime, because he may be hurt in his worldly interest, or at least hurt in his mind: but the law does not regard that uneasiness which a man feels on having his ancestor calumniated.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2906" id="noteref-2906" epub:type="noteref">2906</a> That is too <a id="III-page-16" />nice. Let him deny what is said, and let the matter have a fair chance by discussion. But, if a man could say nothing against a character but what he can prove, history could not be written; for a great deal is known of men of which proof cannot be brought. A minister may be notoriously known to take bribes, and yet you may not be able to prove it.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murray suggested, that the author should be obliged to show some sort of evidence, though he would not require a strict legal proof: but Johnson firmly and resolutely opposed any restraint whatever, as adverse to a free investigation of the characters of mankind.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2907" id="noteref-2907" epub:type="noteref">2907</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-17">On Thursday, April 4, having called on <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, I said, it was a pity that truth was not so firm as to bid defiance to all attacks, so that it might be shot at as much as people chose to attempt, and yet remain unhurt. JOHNSON. “Then, Sir, it would not be shot at. Nobody<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2908" id="noteref-2908" epub:type="noteref">2908</a> attempts to dispute that two and two make four: but with contests concerning moral truth, human passions are generally mixed, and therefore it must ever be liable to assault and misrepresentation.”</p>
			<p>On Friday, April 5, being Good Friday, after having attended the morning service at <abbr>St.</abbr> Clement’s Church,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2909" id="noteref-2909" epub:type="noteref">2909</a> I walked home with Johnson. We talked of the Roman Catholic religion. JOHNSON. “In the barbarous ages, Sir, priests and people were equally deceived; but afterwards there were gross corruptions introduced by the clergy, such as indulgences to priests to have concubines, and the worship of images, not, indeed, inculcated, but knowingly permitted.” He strongly censured the licensed stews at Rome. BOSWELL. “So then, Sir, you would allow of no irregular intercourse whatever between the sexes?” JOHNSON. “To be sure I would not, Sir. I would punish it much more than it is done, and so restrain it. In all countries there has been fornication, as in all countries there has been theft; but <a id="III-page-18" />there may be more or less of the one, as well as of the other, in proportion to the force of law. All men will naturally commit fornication, as all men will naturally steal. And, Sir, it is very absurd to argue, as has been often done, that prostitutes are necessary to prevent the violent effects of appetite from violating the decent order of life; nay, should be permitted, in order to preserve the chastity of our wives and daughters. Depend upon it, Sir, severe laws, steadily enforced, would be sufficient against those evils, and would promote marriage.”</p>
			<p>I stated to him this case:⁠—“Suppose a man has a daughter, who he knows has been seduced, but her misfortune is concealed from the world? should he keep her in his house? Would he not, by doing so, be accessory to imposition? And, perhaps, a worthy, unsuspecting man might come and marry this woman, unless the father inform him of the truth.” JOHNSON. “Sir, he is accessory to no imposition. His daughter is in his house; and if a man courts her, he takes his chance. If a friend, or, indeed, if any man asks his opinion whether he should marry her, he ought to advise him against it, without telling why, because his real opinion is then required. Or, if he has other daughters who know of her frailty, he ought not to keep her in his house. You are to consider the state of life is this; we are to judge of one another’s characters as well as we can; and a man is not bound, in honesty or honour, to tell us the faults of his daughter or of himself. A man who has debauched his friend’s daughter is not obliged to say to everybody⁠—‘Take care of me; don’t let me into your houses without suspicion. I once debauched a friend’s daughter. I may debauch yours.’ ”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale called upon him, and appeared to bear the loss of his son with a manly composure. There was no affectation about him; and he talked, as usual, upon indifferent subjects.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2910" id="noteref-2910" epub:type="noteref">2910</a> He seemed to me to hesitate as to the intended Italian tour, on <a id="III-page-19" />which, I flattered myself, he and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson were soon to set out; and, therefore, I pressed it as much as I could. I mentioned, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beauclerk had said, that Baretti, whom they were to carry with them, would keep them so long in the little towns of his own district, that they would not have time to see Rome. I mentioned this, to put them on their guard. JOHNSON. “Sir, we do not thank <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beauclerk for supposing that we are to be directed by Baretti. No, Sir; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale is to go, by my advice, to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jackson,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2911" id="noteref-2911" epub:type="noteref">2911</a> (the all-knowing) and get from him a plan for seeing the most that can be seen in the time that we have to travel. We must, to be sure, see Rome, Naples, Florence, and Venice, and as much more as we can.” (Speaking with a tone of animation.)</p>
			<p>When I expressed an earnest wish for his remarks on Italy, he said, “I do not see that I could make a book upon Italy;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2912" id="noteref-2912" epub:type="noteref">2912</a> yet I should be glad to get two hundred pounds, or five hundred pounds, by such a work.” This showed both that a journal of his Tour upon the Continent was not wholly out of his contemplation, and that he uniformly adhered to that strange opinion, which his indolent disposition made him utter: “No man but a blockhead ever wrote, except for money.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2913" id="noteref-2913" epub:type="noteref">2913</a>” Numerous instances to refute this will occur to all who are versed in the history of literature.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2914" id="noteref-2914" epub:type="noteref">2914</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-20">He gave us one of the many sketches of character which were treasured in his mind, and which he was wont to produce quite unexpectedly in a very entertaining manner. “I lately, (said he,) received a letter from the East Indies, from a gentleman whom I formerly knew very well; he had returned from that country with a handsome fortune, as it was reckoned, before means were found to acquire those immense sums which have been brought from thence of late; he was a scholar, and an agreeable man, and lived very prettily in London, till his wife died. After her death, he took to dissipation and gaming, and lost all he had. One evening he lost a thousand pounds to a gentleman whose name I am sorry I have forgotten. Next morning he sent the gentleman five hundred pounds, with an apology that it was all he had in the world. The gentleman sent the money back to him, declaring he would not accept of it; and adding, that if <abbr>Mr.</abbr> ⸺ had occasion for five hundred pounds more, he would lend it to him. He resolved to go out again to the East Indies, and make his fortune anew. He got a considerable appointment, and I had some intention of accompanying him. Had I thought then as I do now, I should have gone: but, at that time, I had objections to quitting England.”</p>
			<p>It was a very remarkable circumstance about Johnson, whom shallow observers have supposed to have been ignorant of the world, that very few men had seen greater variety of characters; and none could observe them better, as was evident from the strong, yet nice portraits which he often drew. I have frequently thought that if he had made out what the French call <i xml:lang="fr">une catalogue raisonnée</i> of all the people who had passed under <a id="III-page-21" />his observation, it would have afforded a very rich fund of instruction and entertainment. The suddenness with which his accounts of some of them started out in conversation, was not less pleasing than surprising. I remember he once observed to me, “It is wonderful, Sir, what is to be found in London. The most literary conversation that I ever enjoyed, was at the table of Jack Ellis, a money-scrivener behind the Royal Exchange, with whom I at one period used to dine generally once a week.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2915" id="noteref-2915" epub:type="noteref">2915</a>”</p>
			<p>Volumes would be required to contain a list of his numerous and various acquaintance,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2916" id="noteref-2916" epub:type="noteref">2916</a> none of whom he ever forgot; and could describe and discriminate them all with precision and vivacity. He associated with persons the most widely different in manners, abilities, rank and accomplishments.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2917" id="noteref-2917" epub:type="noteref">2917</a> He was at <a id="III-page-22" />once the companion of the brilliant Colonel Forrester<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2918" id="noteref-2918" epub:type="noteref">2918</a> of the Guards, who wrote <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Polite Philosopher</i>, and of the awkward and uncouth Robert Levet; of Lord Thurlow, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sastres, the Italian master; and has dined one day with the beautiful, gay, and fascinating Lady Craven,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2919" id="noteref-2919" epub:type="noteref">2919</a> and the next with good <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gardiner,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2920" id="noteref-2920" epub:type="noteref">2920</a> the tallow-chandler, on Snow-hill.</p>
			<p>On my expressing my wonder at his discovering so much of the knowledge peculiar to different professions, he told me, “I learnt what I know of law, chiefly from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ballow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2921" id="noteref-2921" epub:type="noteref">2921</a> a very able man. I learnt some, too, from Chambers;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2922" id="noteref-2922" epub:type="noteref">2922</a> but was not so teachable then. One is not willing to be taught by a young man.” When I expressed a wish to know more about <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ballow, Johnson said, “Sir, I have seen him but once these twenty years. The tide of life has driven us different ways.” I was sorry at the time to hear this; but whoever quits the creeks of private connections, and fairly gets into the great ocean of London, will, by imperceptible degrees, unavoidably experience such cessations of acquaintance.</p>
			<p>“My knowledge of physic, (he added,) I learnt from <abbr>Dr.</abbr> James, whom I helped in writing the proposals for his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i> and also a little in the Dictionary itself.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2923" id="noteref-2923" epub:type="noteref">2923</a> I also learnt from <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lawrence, but was then grown more stubborn.”</p>
			<p>A curious incident happened today, while <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale and I sat with him. Francis announced that a large packet was brought to him from the post-office, said to have come from <a id="III-page-23" />Lisbon, and it was charged <em>seven pounds ten shillings</em>. He would not receive it, supposing it to be some trick, nor did he even look at it. But upon enquiry afterwards he found that it was a real packet for him, from that very friend in the East Indies of whom he had been speaking; and the ship which carried it having come to Portugal, this packet, with others, had been put into the post-office at Lisbon.</p>
			<p>I mentioned a new gaming-club,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2924" id="noteref-2924" epub:type="noteref">2924</a> of which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beauclerk had given me an account, where the members played to a desperate extent. JOHNSON. “Depend upon it, Sir, this is mere talk. <em>Who</em> is ruined by gaming? You will not find six instances in an age. There is a strange rout made about deep play: whereas you have many more people ruined by adventurous trade, and yet we do not hear such an outcry against it.” THRALE. “There may be few people absolutely ruined by deep play; but very many are much hurt in their circumstances by it.” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir, and so are very many by other kinds of expense.” I had heard him talk once before in the same manner; and at Oxford he said, “he wished he had learnt to play at cards.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2925" id="noteref-2925" epub:type="noteref">2925</a> The truth, however, is, that he loved to display his ingenuity in argument; and therefore would sometimes in conversation maintain opinions which he was sensible were wrong, but in supporting which, his reasoning and wit would be most conspicuous.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2926" id="noteref-2926" epub:type="noteref">2926</a> He would begin thus: “Why, Sir, as to <a id="III-page-24" />the good or evil of card-playing⁠—” “Now, (said Garrick,) he is thinking which side he shall take.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2927" id="noteref-2927" epub:type="noteref">2927</a> He appeared to have a pleasure in contradiction, especially when any opinion whatever was delivered with an air of confidence;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2928" id="noteref-2928" epub:type="noteref">2928</a> so that there was hardly any topic, if not one of the great truths of Religion and Morality, that he might not have been incited to argue, either for or against. Lord Elibank<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2929" id="noteref-2929" epub:type="noteref">2929</a> had the highest admiration of his powers. He once observed to me, “Whatever opinion Johnson maintains, I will not say that he convinces me; but he never fails to show me, that he has good reasons for it.” I have heard Johnson pay his Lordship this high compliment: “I never was in Lord Elibank’s company without learning something.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2930" id="noteref-2930" epub:type="noteref">2930</a></p>
			<p>We sat together till it was too late for the afternoon service. Thrale said he had come with intention to go to church with us. We went at seven to evening prayers at <abbr>St.</abbr> Clement’s church, after having drank coffee; an indulgence, which I understood Johnson yielded to on this occasion, in compliment to Thrale.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2931" id="noteref-2931" epub:type="noteref">2931</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-25">On Sunday, April 7, Easter-day, after having been at <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s Cathedral, I came to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, according to my usual custom. It seemed to me, that there was always something peculiarly mild and placid in his manner upon this holy festival, the commemoration of the most joyful event in the history of our world, the resurrection of our LORD and SAVIOUR, who, having triumphed over death and the grave, proclaimed immortality to mankind.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2932" id="noteref-2932" epub:type="noteref">2932</a></p>
			<p>I repeated to him an argument of a lady of my acquaintance, who maintained, that her husband’s having been guilty of numberless infidelities, released her from conjugal obligations, because they were reciprocal. JOHNSON. “This is miserable stuff, Sir. To the contract of marriage, besides the man and wife, there is a third party⁠—Society; and if it be considered as a vow⁠—GOD: and, therefore, it cannot be dissolved by their consent alone. Laws are not made for particular cases, but for men in general. A woman may be unhappy with her husband; but she cannot be freed from him without the approbation of the civil and ecclesiastical power. A man may be unhappy, because he is not so rich as another; but he is not to seize upon another’s property with his own hand.” BOSWELL. “But, Sir, this lady does not want that the contract should be dissolved; she only argues that she may indulge herself in gallantries with equal freedom as her husband does, provided she takes care not to introduce a spurious issue into his family. You know, Sir, what Macrobius has told us of Julia.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2933" id="noteref-2933" epub:type="noteref">2933</a>” JOHNSON. “This lady of yours, Sir, I think, is very fit for a brothel.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Macbean,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2934" id="noteref-2934" epub:type="noteref">2934</a> author of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary of Ancient Geography</i>, came in. He mentioned that he had been forty years absent from Scotland. “Ah, Boswell! (said Johnson, smiling,) what would you give to be forty years from Scotland?” I said, “I should not like to be so long absent from the seat of my ancestors.” This gentleman, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Levet, dined with us.</p>
			<p id="III-page-26"><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson made a remark, which both <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Macbean and I thought new. It was this: that “the law against usury is for the protection of creditors as well as of debtors; for if there were no such check, people would be apt, from the temptation of great interest, to lend to desperate persons, by whom they would lose their money. Accordingly there are instances of ladies being ruined, by having injudiciously sunk their fortunes for high annuities, which, after a few years, ceased to be paid, in consequence of the ruined circumstances of the borrower.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams was very peevish; and I wondered at Johnson’s patience with her now, as I had often done on similar occasions. The truth is, that his humane consideration of the forlorn and indigent state in which this lady was left by her father, induced him to treat her with the utmost tenderness, and even to be desirous of procuring her amusement, so as sometimes to incommode many of his friends, by carrying her with him to their houses, where, from her manner of eating, in consequence of her blindness, she could not but offend the delicacy of persons of nice sensations.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2935" id="noteref-2935" epub:type="noteref">2935</a></p>
			<p>After coffee, we went to afternoon service in <abbr>St.</abbr> Clement’s church. Observing some beggars in the street as we walked along, I said to him I supposed there was no civilised country in the world, where the misery of want in the lowest classes of the people was prevented. JOHNSON. “I believe, Sir, there is not; but it is better that some should be unhappy, than that none should be happy, which would be the case in a general state of equality.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2936" id="noteref-2936" epub:type="noteref">2936</a></p>
			<p>When the service was ended, I went home with him, and we sat quietly by ourselves. He recommended <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cheyne’s books. I said, I thought Cheyne had been reckoned whimsical. “So he was, (said he,) in some things; but there is no end of objections. There are few books to which some objection or other may not be made.” He added, “I would not have you read anything else of Cheyne, but his book on Health, and his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">English Malady</i>.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2937" id="noteref-2937" epub:type="noteref">2937</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-27">Upon the question whether a man who had been guilty of vicious actions would do well to force himself into solitude and sadness; JOHNSON. “No, Sir, unless it prevent him from being vicious again. With some people, gloomy penitence is only madness turned upside down. A man may be gloomy, till, in order to be relieved from gloom, he has recourse again to criminal indulgencies.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2938" id="noteref-2938" epub:type="noteref">2938</a></p>
			<p>On Wednesday, April 10, I dined with him at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale’s, where were <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murphy and some other company. Before dinner, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson and I passed some time by ourselves. I was sorry to find it was now resolved that the proposed journey to Italy should not take place this year.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2939" id="noteref-2939" epub:type="noteref">2939</a> He said, “I am <a id="III-page-28" />disappointed, to be sure; but it is not a great disappointment.” I wondered to see him bear, with a philosophical calmness, what would have made most people peevish and fretful. I perceived, however, that he had so warmly cherished the hope of enjoying classical scenes, that he could not easily part with the scheme; for he said, “I shall probably contrive to get to Italy some other way. But I won’t mention it to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale, as it might vex them.” I suggested, that going to Italy might have done <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale good. JOHNSON. “I rather believe not, Sir. While grief is fresh, every attempt to divert only irritates. You must wait till grief be <em>digested</em>, and then amusement will dissipate the remains of it.”</p>
			<p>At dinner, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murphy entertained us with the history of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Joseph Simpson,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2940" id="noteref-2940" epub:type="noteref">2940</a> a schoolfellow of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s, a barrister at law, of good parts, but who fell into a dissipated course of life, incompatible with that success in his profession which he once had, and would otherwise have deservedly maintained; yet he still preserved a dignity in his deportment. He wrote a tragedy on the story of Leonidas, entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">The Patriot</i>. He read it to a company of lawyers, who found so many faults, that he wrote it over again: so then there were two tragedies on the same subject and with the same title. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson told us, that one of them was still in his possession. This very piece was, after his death, published by some person who had been about him, and, for the sake of a little hasty profit, was fallaciously advertised, so as to make it be believed to have been written by Johnson himself.</p>
			<p>I said, I disliked the custom which some people had of bringing their children into company,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2941" id="noteref-2941" epub:type="noteref">2941</a> because it in a manner forced us to pay foolish compliments to please their parents. JOHNSON. “You are right, Sir. We may be excused for not <a id="III-page-29" />caring much about other people’s children, for there are many who care very little about their own children. It may be observed, that men, who from being engaged in business, or from their course of life in whatever way, seldom see their children, do not care much about them. I myself should not have had much fondness for a child of my own.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2942" id="noteref-2942" epub:type="noteref">2942</a> MRS. THRALE. “Nay, Sir, how can you talk so?” JOHNSON. “At least, I never wished to have a child.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murphy mentioned <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s having a design to publish an edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cowley</i>. Johnson said, he did not know but he should; and he expressed his disapprobation of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hurd, for having published a mutilated edition under the title of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Select Works of Abraham Cowley</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2943" id="noteref-2943" epub:type="noteref">2943</a> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murphy thought it a bad precedent; observing that any author might be used in the same manner; and that it was pleasing to see the variety of an author’s compositions, at different periods.</p>
			<p>We talked of Flatman’s Poems; and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale observed, that Pope had partly borrowed from him <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The dying Christian to his Soul</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2944" id="noteref-2944" epub:type="noteref">2944</a> Johnson repeated Rochester’s verses upon Flatman,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2945" id="noteref-2945" epub:type="noteref">2945</a> which I think by much too severe:</p>
			<p>“Nor that slow drudge in swift Pindarick strains,<br/>
			Flatman, who Cowley imitates with pains,<br/>
			And rides a jaded Muse, whipt with loose reins.”</p>
			<p>I like to recollect all the passages that I heard Johnson repeat: it stamps a value on them.</p>
			<p>He told us, that the book entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Lives of the Poets</i>, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cibber, was entirely compiled by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shiels, a Scotchman, one of his amanuenses. “The bookseller (said he,) gave Theophilus Cibber, who was then in prison, ten guineas, to allow <em><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cibber</em> to be put upon the title-page, as the author; by this, a double imposition was intended: in the first place, <a id="III-page-30" />that it was the work of a Cibber at all; and, in the second place, that it was the work of old Cibber.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2946" id="noteref-2946" epub:type="noteref">2946</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-31"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murphy said, that <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Memoirs of Gray’s Life</i> set him much higher in his estimation than his poems did; “for you there saw a man constantly at work in literature.” Johnson acquiesced in this; but depreciated the book, I thought, very unreasonably. For he said, “I forced myself to read it, only because it was a common topic of conversation. I found it mighty dull; and, as to the style, it is fit for the second table.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2947" id="noteref-2947" epub:type="noteref">2947</a>” Why he thought so I was at a loss to conceive. He now gave it as his opinion, that “Akenside<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2948" id="noteref-2948" epub:type="noteref">2948</a> was a superior poet both to Gray and Mason.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-32">Talking of the Reviews, Johnson said, “I think them very impartial: I do not know an instance of partiality.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2949" id="noteref-2949" epub:type="noteref">2949</a> He mentioned what had passed upon the subject of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Monthly</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Critical Reviews</i>, in the conversation with which his Majesty had honoured him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2950" id="noteref-2950" epub:type="noteref">2950</a> He expatiated a little more on them this evening. “The Monthly Reviewers (said he) are not Deists; but they are Christians with as little christianity as may be; and are for pulling down all establishments. The Critical Reviewers are for supporting the constitution both in church and state.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2951" id="noteref-2951" epub:type="noteref">2951</a> The Critical Reviewers, I believe, often review without reading the books through; but lay hold of a topic, and write chiefly from their own minds. The Monthly Reviewers are duller men, and are glad to read the books through.”</p>
			<p>He talked of Lord Lyttelton’s extreme anxiety as an author; observing, that “he was thirty years in preparing his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History</i>, and that he employed a man to point it for him; as if (laughing) another man could point his sense better than himself.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2952" id="noteref-2952" epub:type="noteref">2952</a> <a id="III-page-33" /><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murphy said, he understood his history was kept back several years for fear of Smollet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2953" id="noteref-2953" epub:type="noteref">2953</a> JOHNSON. “This seems strange to Murphy and me, who never felt that anxiety, but sent what we wrote to the press, and let it take its chance.” MRS. THRALE. “The time has been, Sir, when you felt it.” JOHNSON. “Why really, Madam, I do not recollect a time when that was the case.”</p>
			<p>Talking of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Spectator</i>, he said, “It is wonderful that there is such a proportion of bad papers, in the half of the work which was not written by Addison; for there was all the world to write that half, yet not a half of that half is good. One of the finest pieces in the English language is the paper on Novelty,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2954" id="noteref-2954" epub:type="noteref">2954</a> yet we do not hear it talked of. It was written by Grove, a dissenting <em>teacher</em>.” He would not, I perceived, call him a <em>clergyman</em>, though he was candid enough to allow very great merit to his composition. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murphy said, he remembered when there were several people alive in London, who enjoyed a considerable reputation merely from having written a paper in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Spectator</i>. He <a id="III-page-34" />mentioned particularly <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ince, who used to frequent Tom’s coffeehouse. “But (said Johnson,) you must consider how highly Steele speaks of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ince.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2955" id="noteref-2955" epub:type="noteref">2955</a>” He would not allow that the paper<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2956" id="noteref-2956" epub:type="noteref">2956</a> on carrying a boy to travel, signed <q>Philip Homebred</q>, which was reported to be written by the Lord Chancellor Hardwicke, had merit. He said, “it was quite vulgar, and had nothing luminous.”</p>
			<p>Johnson mentioned <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Barry’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2957" id="noteref-2957" epub:type="noteref">2957</a> System of Physick. “He was a man (said he,) who had acquired a high reputation in Dublin, came over to England, and brought his reputation with him, but had not great success. His notion was, that pulsation occasions death by attrition; and that, therefore, the way to preserve life is to retard pulsation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2958" id="noteref-2958" epub:type="noteref">2958</a> But we know that pulsation is strongest in infants, and that we increase in growth while it operates in its regular course; so it cannot be the cause of destruction.” Soon after this, he said something very flattering to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale, which I do not recollect; but it concluded with wishing her long life. “Sir, (said I,) if <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Barry’s system be true, you have now shortened <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale’s life, perhaps, some minutes, by accelerating her pulsation.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-35">On Thursday, April 11,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2959" id="noteref-2959" epub:type="noteref">2959</a> I dined with him at General Paoli’s, in whose house I now resided, and where I had ever afterwards the honour of being entertained with the kindest attention as his constant guest, while I was in London, till I had a house of my own there. I mentioned my having that morning introduced to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Garrick, Count Neni, a Flemish Nobleman of great rank and fortune, to whom Garrick talked of Abel Drugger<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2960" id="noteref-2960" epub:type="noteref">2960</a> as <q>a small part</q>; and related, with pleasant vanity, that a Frenchman who had seen him in one of his low characters, exclaimed, “<i xml:lang="fr">Comment! je ne le crois pas. Ce n’est pas Monsieur Garrick, ce Grand Homme</i>!” Garrick added, with an appearance of grave recollection, “If I were to begin life again, I think I should not play those low characters.” Upon which I observed, “Sir, you would be in the wrong; for your great excellence is your variety of playing, your representing so well, characters so very different.” JOHNSON. “Garrick, Sir, was not in earnest in what he said; for, to be sure, his peculiar excellence is his variety<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2961" id="noteref-2961" epub:type="noteref">2961</a>: and, perhaps, there is not any one character which has not been as well acted by somebody else, as he could do it.” BOSWELL. “Why then, Sir, did he talk so?” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, to make you answer as you did.” BOSWELL. “I don’t know, Sir; he seemed to dip deep into his mind for the reflection.” JOHNSON. “He had not far to dip, Sir: he said the same thing, probably, twenty times before.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-36">Of a nobleman raised at a very early period to high office, he said, “His parts, Sir, are pretty well for a Lord; but would not be distinguished in a man who had nothing else but his parts<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2962" id="noteref-2962" epub:type="noteref">2962</a>’.</p>
			<p>A journey to Italy was still in his thoughts.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2963" id="noteref-2963" epub:type="noteref">2963</a> He said, “A man who has not been in Italy, is always conscious of an inferiority, from his not having seen what it is expected a man should see. The grand object of travelling is to see the shores of the Mediterranean. On those shores were the four great Empires of the world; the Assyrian, the Persian, the Grecian, and the Roman.⁠—All our religion, almost all our law, almost all our arts, almost all that sets us above savages, has come to us from the shores of the Mediterranean.” The General observed, that “THE MEDITERRANEAN would be a noble subject for a poem.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2964" id="noteref-2964" epub:type="noteref">2964</a>”</p>
			<p>We talked of translation. I said, I could not define it, nor could I think of a similitude to illustrate it; but that it appeared to me the translation of poetry could be only imitation. JOHNSON. “You may translate books of science exactly. You may also translate history, in so far as it is not embellished with oratory,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2965" id="noteref-2965" epub:type="noteref">2965</a> which is poetical. Poetry, indeed, cannot be translated; and, therefore, it is the poets that preserve languages; for we would not be at the trouble to learn a language, if we could have all that is written in it just as well in a translation. But as the beauties of poetry cannot be preserved in any language except that in which it was originally written, we learn the language.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-37">A gentleman maintained that the art of printing had hurt real learning, by disseminating idle writings.⁠—JOHNSON. “Sir, if it had not been for the art of printing, we should now have no learning at all; for books would have perished faster than they could have been transcribed.” This observation seems not just, considering for how many ages books were preserved by writing alone.</p>
			<p>The same gentleman maintained, that a general diffusion of knowledge among a people was a disadvantage; for it made the vulgar rise above their humble sphere. JOHNSON. “Sir, while knowledge is a distinction, those who are possessed of it will naturally rise above those who are not. Merely to read and write was a distinction at first; but we see when reading and writing have become general, the common people keep their stations. And so, were higher attainments to become general the effect would be the same.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2966" id="noteref-2966" epub:type="noteref">2966</a></p>
			<p>“Goldsmith (he said), referred everything to vanity; his virtues, and his vices too, were from that motive. He was not a social man. He never exchanged mind with you.”</p>
			<p>We spent the evening at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hoole’s. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mickle, the excellent translator of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Lusiad</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2967" id="noteref-2967" epub:type="noteref">2967</a> was there. I have preserved little of the conversation of this evening.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2968" id="noteref-2968" epub:type="noteref">2968</a> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson said, “Thomson had a true poetical genius, the power of viewing everything in a poetical light. His fault is such a cloud of words sometimes, that the sense can hardly peep through. Shiels, who compiled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cibber’s Lives of the Poets</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2969" id="noteref-2969" epub:type="noteref">2969</a> was one day sitting with me. I took down Thomson, and read aloud a large portion of him, and then asked⁠—Is not this fine? Shiels having expressed the highest admiration. Well, Sir, (said I,) I have omitted every other line.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2970" id="noteref-2970" epub:type="noteref">2970</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-38">I related a dispute between Goldsmith and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Robert Dodsley, one day when they and I were dining at Tom Davies’s, in 1762. Goldsmith asserted, that there was no poetry produced in this age. Dodsley appealed to his own <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collection</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2971" id="noteref-2971" epub:type="noteref">2971</a> and maintained, that though you could not find a palace like Dryden’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Ode on <abbr>St.</abbr> Cecilia’s Day</i>, you had villages composed of very pretty houses; and he mentioned particularly <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Spleen</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2972" id="noteref-2972" epub:type="noteref">2972</a> JOHNSON. “I think Dodsley gave up the question. He and Goldsmith said the same thing; only he said it in a softer manner than Goldsmith did; for he acknowledged that there was no poetry, nothing that towered above the common mark. You may find wit and humour in verse, and yet no poetry. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Hudibras</i> has a profusion of these; yet it is not to be reckoned a poem. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Spleen</i>, in Dodsley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collection</i>, on which you say he chiefly rested, is not poetry.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2973" id="noteref-2973" epub:type="noteref">2973</a>” BOSWELL. “Does not Gray’s poetry, Sir, tower above the common mark?” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir; but we must attend to the difference between what men in general cannot do if they would, and what every man may do if he would. Sixteen-string Jack<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2974" id="noteref-2974" epub:type="noteref">2974</a> towered above the common mark.” BOSWELL. “Then, Sir, what is poetry?” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, it is much easier to say what it is not. We all <em>know</em> what light is; but it is not easy to <em>tell</em> what it is.”</p>
			<p>On Friday, April 12, I dined with him at our friend Tom Davies’s, where we met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cradock, of Leicestershire, author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Zobeide</i>, a tragedy;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2975" id="noteref-2975" epub:type="noteref">2975</a> a very pleasing gentleman, to whom my friend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Farmer’s very excellent <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essay on the Learning of Shakespeare</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2976" id="noteref-2976" epub:type="noteref">2976</a> is addressed; and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Harwood, who has written <a id="III-page-39" />and published various works; particularly a fantastical translation of the New Testament, in modern phrase,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2977" id="noteref-2977" epub:type="noteref">2977</a> and with a Socinian twist.</p>
			<p>I introduced Aristotle’s doctrine in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Art of Poetry</i>, of “the [Greek: katharis ton pathaematon], the purging of the passions,” as the purpose of tragedy.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2978" id="noteref-2978" epub:type="noteref">2978</a> “But how are the passions to be purged by terror and pity?” (said I, with an assumed air of ignorance, to incite him to talk, for which it was often necessary to employ some address).<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2979" id="noteref-2979" epub:type="noteref">2979</a> JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, you are to consider what is the meaning of purging in the original sense. It is to expel impurities from the human body. The mind is subject to the same imperfection. The passions are the great movers of human actions; but they are mixed with such impurities, that it is necessary they should be purged or refined by means of terror and pity. For instance, ambition is a noble passion; but by seeing upon the stage, that a man who is so excessively ambitious as to raise himself by injustice, is punished, we are terrified at the fatal consequences of such a passion. In the same manner a certain degree of resentment is necessary; but if we see that a man carries it too far, we pity the object of it, and are taught to moderate that passion.” My record upon this occasion does great injustice to Johnson’s expression, which was so forcible and brilliant, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cradock whispered me, “O that his words were written in a book<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2980" id="noteref-2980" epub:type="noteref">2980</a>!”</p>
			<p id="III-page-40">I observed, the great defect of the tragedy of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Othello</i> was, that it had not a moral; for that no man could resist the circumstances of suspicion which were artfully suggested to Othello’s mind. JOHNSON. “In the first place, Sir, we learn from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Othello</i> this very useful moral, not to make an unequal match; in the second place, we learn not to yield too readily to suspicion. The handkerchief is merely a trick, though a very pretty trick; but there are no other circumstances of reasonable suspicion, except what is related by Iago of Cassio’s warm expressions concerning Desdemona in his sleep; and that depended entirely upon the assertion of one man.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2981" id="noteref-2981" epub:type="noteref">2981</a> No, Sir, I think <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Othello</i> has more moral than almost any play.”</p>
			<p>Talking of a penurious gentleman of our acquaintance, Johnson said, “Sir, he is narrow, not so much from avarice, as from impotence to spend his money. He cannot find in his heart to pour out a bottle of wine; but he would not much care if it should sour.”</p>
			<p>He said, he wished to see John Dennis’s <i>Critical Works</i> collected. Davies said they would not sell. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson seemed to think otherwise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2982" id="noteref-2982" epub:type="noteref">2982</a></p>
			<p>Davies said of a well-known dramatic author, that “he lived upon <q>potted stories</q>, and that he made his way as Hannibal did, by vinegar; having begun by attacking people; particularly the players.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2983" id="noteref-2983" epub:type="noteref">2983</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-41">He reminded <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murphy’s having paid him the highest compliment that ever was paid to a layman, by asking his pardon for repeating some oaths in the course of telling a story.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2984" id="noteref-2984" epub:type="noteref">2984</a></p>
			<p>Johnson and I supt this evening at the Crown and Anchor tavern, in company with Sir Joshua Reynolds, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Nairne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2985" id="noteref-2985" epub:type="noteref">2985</a> now one of the Scotch Judges, with the title of Lord Dunsinan, and my very worthy friend, Sir William Forbes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2986" id="noteref-2986" epub:type="noteref">2986</a> of Pitsligo.</p>
			<p>We discussed the question whether drinking improved conversation and benevolence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2987" id="noteref-2987" epub:type="noteref">2987</a> Sir Joshua maintained it did. JOHNSON. “No, Sir: before dinner men meet with great inequality of understanding; and those who are conscious of their inferiority, have the modesty not to talk. When they have drunk wine, every man feels himself happy, and loses that modesty, and grows impudent and vociferous: but he is not improved; he is only not sensible of his defects.” Sir Joshua said the Doctor was talking of the effects of excess in wine; but that a moderate glass enlivened the mind, by giving a proper circulation to the blood. “I am (said he,) in very good spirits, when I get up in the morning. By dinnertime I am exhausted; wine puts me in the same state as when I got up; and I am sure that moderate drinking makes people talk better.” JOHNSON. “No, Sir; wine gives not light, gay, ideal hilarity; but tumultuous, noisy, clamorous merriment. I have heard none of those drunken⁠—nay, drunken is a coarse word⁠—none of those <em>vinous</em> flights.” SIR JOSHUA. “Because you have sat by, quite sober, and felt an envy of the happiness of those who were drinking.” JOHNSON. “Perhaps, contempt.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2988" id="noteref-2988" epub:type="noteref">2988</a>⁠—And, Sir, it is not necessary to be drunk one’s self, to relish the wit of drunkenness. Do we not judge of the drunken wit, of the dialogue between Iago and Cassio, the most excellent in its kind, when we are quite sober? Wit is wit, by whatever means it is produced; and, if good, will appear so at all times. I admit that the spirits are raised by drinking, as by the common <a id="III-page-42" />participation of any pleasure: cockfighting, or bear-baiting, will raise the spirits of a company, as drinking does, though surely they will not improve conversation. I also admit, that there are some sluggish men who are improved by drinking; as there are fruits which are not good till they are rotten. There are such men, but they are medlars. I indeed allow that there have been a very few men of talents who were improved by drinking; but I maintain that I am right as to the effects of drinking in general: and let it be considered, that there is no position, however false in its universality, which is not true of some particular man.” Sir William Forbes said, “Might not a man warmed with wine be like a bottle of beer, which is made brisker by being set before the fire?” “Nay, (said Johnson, laughing,) I cannot answer that: that is too much for me.”</p>
			<p>I observed, that wine did some people harm, by inflaming, confusing, and irritating their minds; but that the experience of mankind had declared in favour of moderate drinking. JOHNSON. “Sir, I do not say it is wrong to produce self complacency by drinking; I only deny that it improves the mind. When I drank wine, I scorned to drink it when in company.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2989" id="noteref-2989" epub:type="noteref">2989</a> I have drunk many a bottle by myself; in the first place, because I had need of it to raise my spirits; in the second place, because I would have nobody to witness its effects upon me.”</p>
			<p>He told us, “almost all his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Ramblers</i> were written just as they were wanted for the press; that he sent a certain portion of the copy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2990" id="noteref-2990" epub:type="noteref">2990</a> of an essay, and wrote the remainder, while the former part of it was printing. When it was wanted, and he had fairly sat down to it, he was sure it would be done.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2991" id="noteref-2991" epub:type="noteref">2991</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-43">He said, that for general improvement, a man should read whatever his immediate inclination prompts him to; though, to be sure, if a man has a science to learn, he must regularly and resolutely advance. He added, “what we read with inclination makes a much stronger impression. If we read without inclination, half the mind is employed in fixing the attention; so there is but one half to be employed on what we read.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2992" id="noteref-2992" epub:type="noteref">2992</a> He told us, he read Fielding’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Amelia</i> through without stopping.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2993" id="noteref-2993" epub:type="noteref">2993</a> He said, “if a man begins to read in the middle of a book, and feels an inclination to go on, let him not quit it, to go to the beginning. He may perhaps not feel again the inclination.”</p>
			<p>Sir Joshua mentioned <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cumberland’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Odes</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2994" id="noteref-2994" epub:type="noteref">2994</a> which were just published. JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, they would have been thought as good as Odes commonly are, if Cumberland had not put his name to them; but a name immediately draws censure, unless it be a name that bears down everything before it. Nay, Cumberland has made his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Odes</i> subsidiary to the fame of another man.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2995" id="noteref-2995" epub:type="noteref">2995</a> They might have run well enough by themselves; but he has not only loaded them with a name, but has made them carry double.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-44">We talked of the Reviews, and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson spoke of them as he did at Thrale’s.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2996" id="noteref-2996" epub:type="noteref">2996</a> Sir Joshua said, what I have often thought, that he wondered to find so much good writing employed in them, when the authors were to remain unknown, and so could not have the motive of fame. JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, those who write in them, write well, in order to be paid well.”</p>
			<p>Soon after this day, he went to Bath with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale. I had never seen that beautiful city, and wished to take the opportunity of visiting it, while Johnson was there. Having written to him, I received the following answer.</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.<br/>
			“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“Why do you talk of neglect? When did I neglect you? If you will come to Bath, we shall all be glad to see you. Come, therefore, as soon as you can.</p>
			<p>“But I have a little business for you at London. Bid Francis look in the paper-drawer of the chest of drawers in my bedchamber, for two cases; one for the Attorney-General,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2997" id="noteref-2997" epub:type="noteref">2997</a> and one for the Solicitor-General.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2998" id="noteref-2998" epub:type="noteref">2998</a> They lie, I think, at the top of my papers; otherwise they are somewhere else, and will give me more trouble.</p>
			<p>“Please to write to me immediately, if they can be found. Make my compliments to all our friends round the world, and to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams at home.</p>
			<p>“I am, Sir, your, <abbr>etc.</abbr><br/>
			“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“Search for the papers as soon as you can, that, if it is necessary, I may write to you again before you come down.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-45">On the 26th of April, I went to Bath;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2999" id="noteref-2999" epub:type="noteref">2999</a> and on my arrival at the Pelican inn, found lying for me an obliging invitation from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale, by whom I was agreeably entertained almost constantly during my stay. They were gone to the rooms;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3000" id="noteref-3000" epub:type="noteref">3000</a> but there was a kind note from <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, that he should sit at home all the evening. I went to him directly, and before <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale returned, we had by ourselves some hours of tea-drinking and talk.</p>
			<p>I shall group together such of his sayings as I preserved during the few days that I was at Bath.</p>
			<p>Of a person<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3001" id="noteref-3001" epub:type="noteref">3001</a> who differed from him in politics, he said, “In private life he is a very honest gentleman; but I will not allow him to be so in public life. People <em>may</em> be honest, though they are doing wrong: that is, between their Maker and them. But <em>we</em>, who are suffering by their pernicious conduct, are to destroy them. We are sure that ⸺ acts from interest. We know what his genuine principles were. They who allow their passions to confound the distinctions between right and <a id="III-page-46" />wrong, are criminal. They may be convinced; but they have not come honestly by their conviction.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3002" id="noteref-3002" epub:type="noteref">3002</a></p>
			<p>It having been mentioned, I know not with what truth, that a certain female political writer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3003" id="noteref-3003" epub:type="noteref">3003</a> whose doctrines he disliked, had of late become very fond of dress, sat hours together at her toilet, and even put on rouge:⁠—JOHNSON. “She is better employed at her toilet, than using her pen. It is better she should be reddening her own cheeks, than blackening other people’s characters.”</p>
			<p>He told us that “Addison wrote Budgell’s papers in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Spectator</i>, at least mended them so much, that he made them almost his own; and that Draper, Tonson’s partner, assured <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Johnson, that the much admired Epilogue to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Distressed Mother</i>, which came out in Budgell’s name, was in reality written by Addison.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3004" id="noteref-3004" epub:type="noteref">3004</a></p>
			<p>“The mode of government by one may be ill adapted to a small society, but is best for a great nation. The characteristic of our own government at present is imbecility.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3005" id="noteref-3005" epub:type="noteref">3005</a> The magistrate dare not call the guards for fear of being hanged. The guards will not come, for fear of being given up to the blind rage of popular juries.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3006" id="noteref-3006" epub:type="noteref">3006</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-47">Of the father of one of our friends, he observed, “He never clarified his notions, by filtrating them through other minds. He had a canal upon his estate, where at one place the bank was too low.⁠—I dug the canal deeper,” said he.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3007" id="noteref-3007" epub:type="noteref">3007</a></p>
			<p>He told me that “so long ago as 1748<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3008" id="noteref-3008" epub:type="noteref">3008</a> he had read ‘<i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Grave</i>, a Poem,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3009" id="noteref-3009" epub:type="noteref">3009</a>’ but did not like it much.” I differed from <a id="III-page-48" />him; for though it is not equal throughout, and is seldom elegantly correct, it abounds in solemn thought, and poetical imagery beyond the common reach. The world has differed from him; for the poem has passed through many editions, and is still much read by people of a serious cast of mind.</p>
			<p>A literary lady of large fortune<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3010" id="noteref-3010" epub:type="noteref">3010</a> was mentioned, as one who did good to many, but by no means “by stealth,” and instead of “blushing to find it fame,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3011" id="noteref-3011" epub:type="noteref">3011</a> acted evidently from vanity. JOHNSON. “I have seen no beings who do as much good from benevolence, as she does, from whatever motive. If there are such under the earth, or in the clouds, I wish they would come up, or come down. What Soame Jenyns says upon this subject is not to be minded; he is a wit. No, Sir; to act from pure benevolence is not possible for finite beings. Human benevolence is mingled with vanity, interest, or some other motive.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3012" id="noteref-3012" epub:type="noteref">3012</a></p>
			<p>He would not allow me to praise a lady then at Bath; observing “She does not gain upon me, Sir; I think her empty-headed.” He was, indeed, a stern critic upon characters and manners. Even <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale did not escape his friendly animadversion at times. When he and I were one day endeavouring to ascertain, article by article, how one of our friends<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3013" id="noteref-3013" epub:type="noteref">3013</a> could <a id="III-page-49" />possibly spend as much money in his family as he told us he did, she interrupted us by a lively extravagant sally, on the expense of clothing his children, describing it in a very ludicrous and fanciful manner. Johnson looked a little angry, and said, “Nay, Madam, when you are declaiming, declaim; and when you are calculating, calculate.” At another time, when she said, perhaps affectedly, “I don’t like to fly.” JOHNSON. “With <em>your</em> wings, Madam, you <em>must</em> fly: but have a care, there are <em>clippers</em> abroad.” How very well was this said, and how fully has experience proved the truth of it! But have they not <em>clipped</em> rather <em>rudely</em>, and gone a great deal <em>closer</em> than was necessary?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3014" id="noteref-3014" epub:type="noteref">3014</a></p>
			<p>A gentleman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3015" id="noteref-3015" epub:type="noteref">3015</a> expressed a wish to go and live three years at Otaheité, or New-Zealand, in order to obtain a full acquaintance with people, so totally different from all that we have ever known, and be satisfied what pure nature can do for man. JOHNSON. “What could you learn, Sir? What can savages tell, but what they themselves have seen? Of the past, or the invisible, they can tell nothing. The inhabitants of Otaheité and New-Zealand are not in a state of pure nature; for it is plain they broke off from some other people. Had they grown <a id="III-page-50" />out of the ground, you might have judged of a state of pure nature. Fanciful people may talk of a mythology being amongst them; but it must be invention. They have once had religion, which has been gradually debased. And what account of their religion can you suppose to be learnt from savages? Only consider, Sir, our own state: our religion is in a book; we have an order of men whose duty it is to teach it; we have one day in the week set apart for it, and this is in general pretty well observed: yet ask the first ten gross men you meet, and hear what they can tell of their religion.”</p>
			<p>On Monday, April 29, he and I made an excursion to Bristol, where I was entertained with seeing him enquire upon the spot, into the authenticity of “Rowley’s Poetry,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3016" id="noteref-3016" epub:type="noteref">3016</a> as I had seen him enquire upon the spot into the authenticity of “Ossian’s Poetry.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3017" id="noteref-3017" epub:type="noteref">3017</a> George Catcot, the pewterer, who was as zealous for Rowley, as <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hugh Blair<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3018" id="noteref-3018" epub:type="noteref">3018</a> was for Ossian, (I trust my Reverend friend will excuse the comparison,) attended us at our inn, and with a triumphant air of lively simplicity called out, “I’ll make <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson a convert.” <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, at his desire, read aloud some of Chatterton’s fabricated verses, while Catcot stood at the back of his chair, moving himself like a pendulum, and beating time with his feet, and now and then looking into <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s face, wondering that he was not yet convinced. We called on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barret, the surgeon, and saw some of the <q>originals</q> as they were called, which were executed very artificially;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3019" id="noteref-3019" epub:type="noteref">3019</a> but from a careful inspection of them, and a consideration of the circumstances with which they were attended, we were quite satisfied of the imposture, which, indeed, has been clearly demonstrated from internal evidence, by several able critics.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3020" id="noteref-3020" epub:type="noteref">3020</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-51">Honest Catcot seemed to pay no attention whatever to any objections, but insisted, as an end of all controversy, that we should go with him to the tower of the church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary, Redcliff, and <em>view with our own eyes</em> the ancient chest in which the manuscripts were found. To this, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson good-naturedly agreed; and though troubled with a shortness of breathing, laboured up a long flight of steps, till we came to the place where the wonderous chest stood. “<i>There</i>, (said Catcot, with a bouncing confident credulity,) <em>there</em> is the very chest itself.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3021" id="noteref-3021" epub:type="noteref">3021</a> “After this <em>ocular demonstration</em>, there was no more to be said. He brought to my recollection a Scotch Highlander, a man of learning too, and who had seen the world, attesting, and at the same time giving his reasons for the authenticity of Fingal:⁠—“I have heard all that poem when I was young.”⁠—“Have you, Sir? Pray what have you heard?”⁠—“I have heard Ossian, Oscar, and <em>every one of them</em>.”</p>
			<p>Johnson said of Chatterton, “This is the most extraordinary young man that has encountered my knowledge. It is wonderful how the whelp has written such things.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3022" id="noteref-3022" epub:type="noteref">3022</a></p>
			<p>We were by no means pleased with our inn at Bristol. “Let us see now, (said I,) how we should describe it.” Johnson was ready with his raillery. “Describe it, Sir?⁠—Why, it was so bad that Boswell wished to be in Scotland!”</p>
			<p id="III-page-52">After <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s return to London,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3023" id="noteref-3023" epub:type="noteref">3023</a> I was several times with him at his house, where I occasionally slept, in the room that had been assigned to me.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3024" id="noteref-3024" epub:type="noteref">3024</a> I dined with him at <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor’s, at General Oglethorpe’s, and at General Paoli’s. To avoid a tedious minuteness, I shall group together what I have preserved of his conversation during this period also, without specifying each scene where it passed, except one, which will be found so remarkable as certainly to deserve a very particular relation. Where the place or the persons do not contribute to the zest of the conversation, it is unnecessary to encumber my page with mentioning them. To know of what vintage our wine is, enables us to judge of its value, and to drink it with more relish: but to have the produce of each vine of one vineyard, in the same year, kept separate, would serve no purpose. To know that our wine, (to use an advertising phrase,) is “of the stock of an Ambassadour lately deceased,” heightens its flavour: but it signifies nothing to know the bin where each bottle was once deposited.</p>
			<p>“Garrick (he observed,) does not play the part of Archer in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Beaux Stratagem</i> well. The gentleman should break out through the footman, which is not the case as he does it.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3025" id="noteref-3025" epub:type="noteref">3025</a></p>
			<p>“Where there is no education, as in savage countries, men will have the upper hand of women. Bodily strength, no doubt, contributes to this; but it would be so, exclusive of that; for it is mind that always governs. When it comes to dry understanding, man has the better.”</p>
			<p>“The little volumes entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Respublicae</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3026" id="noteref-3026" epub:type="noteref">3026</a> which are very well done, were a bookseller’s work.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-53">“There is much talk of the misery which we cause to the brute creation; but they are recompensed by existence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3027" id="noteref-3027" epub:type="noteref">3027</a> If they were not useful to man, and therefore protected by him, they would not be nearly so numerous.” This argument is to be found in the able and benignant Hutchinson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Moral Philosophy</i>. But the question is, whether the animals who endure such sufferings of various kinds, for the service and entertainment of man, would accept of existence upon the terms on which they have it. Madame Sévigné,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3028" id="noteref-3028" epub:type="noteref">3028</a> who, though she had many enjoyments, felt with delicate sensibility the prevalence of misery, complains of the task of existence having been imposed upon her without her consent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3029" id="noteref-3029" epub:type="noteref">3029</a></p>
			<p>“That man is never happy for the present is so true, that all his relief from unhappiness is only forgetting himself for a little while. Life is a progress from want to want, not from enjoyment to enjoyment.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3030" id="noteref-3030" epub:type="noteref">3030</a></p>
			<p>“Though many men are nominally entrusted with the administration of hospitals and other public institutions, almost all the good is done by one man, by whom the rest are driven on; owing to confidence in him, and indolence in them.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3031" id="noteref-3031" epub:type="noteref">3031</a></p>
			<p>“Lord Chesterfield’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Letters to his Son</i>, I think, might be made a very pretty book. Take out the immorality, and it should be put into the hands of every young gentleman. An elegant manner and easiness of behaviour are acquired gradually and imperceptibly. No man can say ‘I’ll be genteel.’ There are ten genteel women for one genteel man, because they are more restrained. A man without some degree of restraint is insufferable; but we are all less restrained than women. Were a woman sitting in company to put out her legs before her as most men do, we should be tempted to kick them in.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-54">No man was a more attentive and nice observer of behaviour in those in whose company he happened to be, than Johnson; or, however strange it may seem to many, had a higher estimation of its refinements.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3032" id="noteref-3032" epub:type="noteref">3032</a> Lord Eliot informs me, that one day when Johnson and he were at dinner at a gentleman’s house in London, upon Lord Chesterfield’s Letters being mentioned, Johnson surprised the company by this sentence: “Every man of any education would rather be called a rascal, than accused of deficiency in <em>the graces</em>.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gibbon, who was present, turned to a lady who knew Johnson well, and lived much with him, and in his quaint manner, tapping his box, addressed her thus: “Don’t you think, Madam, (looking towards Johnson,) that among <em>all</em> your acquaintance, you could find <em>one</em> exception?” The lady smiled, and seemed to acquiesce.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3033" id="noteref-3033" epub:type="noteref">3033</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-55">“I read (said he,) Sharpe’s letters on Italy over again, when I was at<br/>
			Bath. There is a great deal of matter in them.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3034" id="noteref-3034" epub:type="noteref">3034</a></p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams was angry that Thrale’s family did not send regularly to her every time they heard from me while I was in the Hebrides. Little people are apt to be jealous: but they should not be jealous; for they ought to consider, that superior attention will necessarily be paid to superior fortune or rank. Two persons may have equal merit, and on that account may have an equal claim to attention; but one of them may have also fortune and rank, and so may have a double claim.”</p>
			<p>Talking of his notes on Shakespeare, he said, “I despise those who do not see that I am right in the passage where ‘as’ is repeated, and ‘asses of great charge’ introduced. That on ‘To be, or not to be,’ is disputable.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3035" id="noteref-3035" epub:type="noteref">3035</a></p>
			<p>A gentleman, whom I found sitting with him one morning, said, that in his opinion the character of an infidel was more detestable than that of a man notoriously guilty of an atrocious crime. I differed from him, because we are surer of the odiousness of the one, than of the error of the other. JOHNSON. “Sir, I agree with him; for the infidel would be guilty of any crime if he were inclined to it.”</p>
			<p>“Many things which are false are transmitted from book to book, and gain credit in the world. One of these is the cry against the evil of luxury. Now the truth is, that luxury <a id="III-page-56" />produces much good.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3036" id="noteref-3036" epub:type="noteref">3036</a> Take the luxury of buildings in London. Does it not produce real advantage in the conveniency and elegance of accommodation, and this all from the exertion of industry? People will tell you, with a melancholy face, how many builders are in gaol. It is plain they are in gaol, not for building; for rents are not fallen.⁠—A man gives half a guinea for a dish of green peas. How much gardening does this occasion? how many labourers must the competition to have such things early in the market, keep in employment? You will hear it said, very gravely, Why was not the half-guinea, thus spent in luxury, given to the poor? To how many might it have afforded a good meal. Alas! has it not gone to the <em>industrious</em> poor, whom it is better to support than the <em>idle</em> poor? You are much surer that you are doing good when you <em>pay</em> money to those who work, as the recompence of their labour, than when you <em>give</em> money merely in charity. Suppose the ancient luxury of a dish of peacock’s brains were to be revived, how many carcases would be left to the poor at a cheap rate: and as to the rout that is made about people who are ruined by extravagance, it is no matter to the nation that some individuals suffer. When so much general productive exertion is the consequence of luxury, the nation does not care though there are debtors in gaol; nay, they would not care though their creditors were there too.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3037" id="noteref-3037" epub:type="noteref">3037</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-57">The uncommon vivacity of General Oglethorpe’s mind, and variety of knowledge, having sometimes made his conversation seem too desultory, Johnson observed, “Oglethorpe, Sir, never <em>completes</em> what he has to say.”</p>
			<p>He on the same account made a similar remark on Patrick Lord Elibank:<br/>
			“Sir, there is nothing <em>conclusive</em> in his talk.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3038" id="noteref-3038" epub:type="noteref">3038</a></p>
			<p>When I complained of having dined at a splendid table without hearing one sentence of conversation worthy of being remembered, he said, “Sir, there seldom is any such conversation.” BOSWELL. “Why then meet at table?” JOHNSON. “Why to eat and drink together, and to promote kindness; and, Sir, this is better done when there is no solid conversation; for when there is, people differ in opinion, and get into bad humour, or some of the company who are not capable of such conversation, are left out, and feel themselves uneasy. It was for this reason, Sir Robert Walpole said, he always talked bawdy at his table, because in that all could join.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3039" id="noteref-3039" epub:type="noteref">3039</a></p>
			<p>Being irritated by hearing a gentleman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3040" id="noteref-3040" epub:type="noteref">3040</a> ask <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Levett a variety of questions concerning him, when he was sitting by, he broke out, “Sir, you have but two topics, yourself and me. I am sick of both.” “A man, (said he,) should not talk of himself, nor much of any particular person. He should take care not to be made a proverb; and, therefore, should avoid having any one topic of which people can say, ‘We shall hear him upon it.’ ” There was a <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Oldfield, who was always talking of the Duke of Marlborough. He came into a coffeehouse one day, and told that his Grace had spoken in the House of Lords for half an hour. “Did he indeed speak for half an hour?” (said Belchier, the surgeon,)⁠—“Yes.”⁠—“And what did he say of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Oldfield?”⁠—“Nothing.”⁠—“Why then, Sir, he was very ungrateful; for <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Oldfield could not have spoken for a quarter of an hour, without saying something of him.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-58">“Every man is to take existence on the terms on which it is given to him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3041" id="noteref-3041" epub:type="noteref">3041</a> To some men it is given on condition of not taking liberties, which other men may take without much harm. One may drink wine, and be nothing the worse for it; on another, wine may have effects so inflammatory as to injure him both in body and mind, and perhaps, make him commit something for which he may deserve to be hanged.”</p>
			<p>“Lord Hailes’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annals of Scotland</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3042" id="noteref-3042" epub:type="noteref">3042</a> have not that painted form which is the taste of this age; but it is a book which will always sell, it has such a stability of dates, such a certainty of facts, and such a punctuality of citation. I never before read Scotch history with certainty.”</p>
			<p>I asked him whether he would advise me to read the Bible with a commentary, and what commentaries he would recommend. JOHNSON. “To be sure, Sir, I would have you read the Bible with a commentary; and I would recommend Lowth and Patrick on the Old Testament, and Hammond on the New.”</p>
			<p>During my stay in London this spring, I solicited his attention to another law case, in which I was engaged. In the course of a contested election for the Borough of Dumfermline, which I attended as one of my friend Colonel (afterwards Sir Archibald) Campbell’s counsel; one of his political agents, who was charged with having been unfaithful to his employer, and having deserted to the opposite party for a pecuniary reward⁠—attacked very rudely in a newspaper the Reverend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> James Thomson, one of the ministers of that place, on account of a supposed allusion to him in one of his sermons. Upon this the minister, on a subsequent Sunday, arraigned him by name from the pulpit with some severity; and the agent, after the sermon was over, rose up and asked the minister aloud, “What bribe he had received for telling so many lies from the chair of verity.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3043" id="noteref-3043" epub:type="noteref">3043</a>” I was present at this very extraordinary scene. The <a id="III-page-59" />person arraigned, and his father and brother, who had also had a share both of the reproof from the pulpit, and in the retaliation, brought an action against <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomson, in the Court of Session, for defamation and damages, and I was one of the counsel for the reverend defendant. The <em>Liberty of the Pulpit</em> was our great ground of defence; but we argued also on the provocation of the previous attack, and on the instant retaliation. The Court of Session, however⁠—the fifteen Judges, who are at the same time the Jury, decided against the minister, contrary to my humble opinion; and several of them expressed themselves with indignation against him. He was an aged gentleman, formerly a military chaplain, and a man of high spirit and honour. Johnson was satisfied that the judgement was wrong, and dictated to me the following argument in confutation of it:</p>
			<p>“Of the censure pronounced from the pulpit, our determination must be formed, as in other cases, by a consideration of the action itself, and the particular circumstances with which it is invested.</p>
			<p>“The right of censure and rebuke seems necessarily appendant to the pastoral office. He, to whom the care of a congregation is entrusted, is considered as the shepherd of a flock, as the teacher of a school, as the father of a family. As a shepherd tending not his own sheep but those of his master, he is answerable for those that stray, and that lose themselves by straying. But no man can be answerable for losses which he has not power to prevent, or for vagrancy which he has not authority to restrain.</p>
			<p>“As a teacher giving instruction for wages, and liable to reproach, if those whom he undertakes to inform make no proficiency, he must have the power of enforcing attendance, of awakening negligence, and repressing contradiction.</p>
			<p>“As a father, he possesses the paternal authority of admonition, rebuke, and punishment. He cannot, without reducing his office to an empty name, be hindered from the exercise of any practice necessary to stimulate the idle, to reform the vicious, to check the petulant, and correct the stubborn.</p>
			<p>“If we enquire into the practice of the primitive church, we shall, I believe, find the ministers of the word exercising the whole authority of this complicated character. We shall find them not only encouraging the good by exhortation, but terrifying the wicked by reproof and denunciation. In the earliest ages of the Church, while religion was yet pure from secular advantages, the punishment of sinners was public censure, and open penance; penalties inflicted merely by <a id="III-page-60" />ecclesiastical authority, at a time while the church had yet no help from the civil power; while the hand of the magistrate lifted only the rod of persecution; and when governours were ready to afford a refuge to all those who fled from clerical authority.</p>
			<p>“That the Church, therefore, had once a power of public censure is evident, because that power was frequently exercised. That it borrowed not its power from the civil authority, is likewise certain, because civil authority was at that time its enemy.</p>
			<p>“The hour came at length, when after three hundred years of struggle and distress, Truth took possession of imperial power, and the civil laws lent their aid to the ecclesiastical constitutions. The magistrate from that time cooperated with the priest, and clerical sentences were made efficacious by secular force. But the State, when it came to the assistance of the church, had no intention to diminish its authority. Those rebukes and those censures which were lawful before, were lawful still. But they had hitherto operated only upon voluntary submission. The refractory and contemptuous were at first in no danger of temporal severities, except what they might suffer from the reproaches of conscience, or the detestation of their fellow Christians. When religion obtained the support of law, if admonitions and censures had no effect, they were seconded by the magistrates with coercion and punishment.</p>
			<p>“It therefore appears from ecclesiastical history, that the right of inflicting shame by public censure, has been always considered as inherent in the Church; and that this right was not conferred by the civil power; for it was exercised when the civil power operated against it. By the civil power it was never taken away; for the Christian magistrate interposed his office, not to rescue sinners from censure, but to supply more powerful means of reformation; to add pain where shame was insufficient; and when men were proclaimed unworthy of the society of the faithful, to restrain them by imprisonment, from spreading abroad the contagion of wickedness.</p>
			<p>“It is not improbable that from this acknowledged power of public censure, grew in time the practice of auricular confession. Those who dreaded the blast of public reprehension, were willing to submit themselves to the priest, by a private accusation of themselves; and to obtain a reconciliation with the Church by a kind of clandestine absolution and invisible penance; conditions with which the priest would in times of ignorance and corruption, easily comply, as they increased his influence, by adding the knowledge of secret sins to that of notorious offences, and enlarged his authority, by making him the sole arbiter of the terms of reconcilement.</p>
			<p id="III-page-61">“From this bondage the Reformation set us free. The minister has no longer power to press into the retirements of conscience, to torture us by interrogatories, or put himself in possession of our secrets and our lives. But though we have thus controlled his usurpations, his just and original power remains unimpaired. He may still see, though he may not pry: he may yet hear, though he may not question. And that knowledge which his eyes and ears force upon him it is still his duty to use, for the benefit of his flock. A father who lives near a wicked neighbour, may forbid a son to frequent his company. A minister who has in his congregation a man of open and scandalous wickedness, may warn his parishioners to shun his conversation. To warn them is not only lawful, but not to warn them would be criminal. He may warn them one by one in friendly converse, or by a parochial visitation. But if he may warn each man singly, what shall forbid him to warn them altogether? Of that which is to be made known to all, how is there any difference whether it be communicated to each singly, or to all together? What is known to all, must necessarily be public. Whether it shall be public at once, or public by degrees, is the only question. And of a sudden and solemn publication the impression is deeper, and the warning more effectual.</p>
			<p>“It may easily be urged, if a minister be thus left at liberty to delate sinners from the pulpit, and to publish at will the crimes of a parishioner, he may often blast the innocent, and distress the timorous. He may be suspicious, and condemn without evidence; he may be rash, and judge without examination; he may be severe, and treat slight offences with too much harshness; he may be malignant and partial, and gratify his private interest or resentment under the shelter of his pastoral character.</p>
			<p>“Of all this there is possibility, and of all this there is danger. But if possibility of evil be to exclude good, no good ever can be done. If nothing is to be attempted in which there is danger, we must all sink into hopeless inactivity. The evils that may be feared from this practice arise not from any defect in the institution, but from the infirmities of human nature. Power, in whatever hands it is placed, will be sometimes improperly exerted; yet courts of law must judge, though they will sometimes judge amiss. A father must instruct his children, though he himself may often want instruction. A minister must censure sinners, though his censure may be sometimes erroneous by want of judgement, and sometimes unjust by want of honesty.</p>
			<p>“If we examine the circumstances of the present case, we shall find the sentence neither erroneous nor unjust; we shall find no breach of private confidence, no intrusion into secret transactions. The fact was notorious and indubitable; so easy to be proved, that no proof was desired. The act was base and treacherous, the perpetration insolent and open, and <a id="III-page-62" />the example naturally mischievous. The minister, however, being retired and recluse, had not yet heard what was publicly known throughout the parish; and on occasion of a public election, warned his people, according to his duty, against the crimes which public elections frequently produce. His warning was felt by one of his parishioners, as pointed particularly at himself. But instead of producing, as might be wished, private compunction and immediate reformation, it kindled only rage and resentment. He charged his minister, in a public paper, with scandal, defamation, and falsehood. The minister, thus reproached, had his own character to vindicate, upon which his pastoral authority must necessarily depend. To be charged with a defamatory lie is an injury which no man patiently endures in common life. To be charged with polluting the pastoral office with scandal and falsehood, was a violation of character still more atrocious, as it affected not only his personal but his clerical veracity. His indignation naturally rose in proportion to his honesty, and with all the fortitude of injured honesty, he dared this calumniator in the church, and at once exonerated himself from censure, and rescued his flock from deception and from danger. The man whom he accuses pretends not to be innocent; or at least only pretends; for he declines a trial. The crime of which he is accused has frequent opportunities and strong temptations. It has already spread far, with much depravation of private morals, and much injury to public happiness. To warn the people, therefore, against it was not wanton and officious, but necessary and pastoral.</p>
			<p>“What then is the fault with which this worthy minister is charged? He has usurped no dominion over conscience. He has exerted no authority in support of doubtful and controverted opinions. He has not dragged into light a bashful and corrigible sinner. His censure was directed against a breach of morality, against an act which no man justifies. The man who appropriated this censure to himself, is evidently and notoriously guilty. His consciousness of his own wickedness incited him to attack his faithful reprover with open insolence and printed accusations. Such an attack made defence necessary; and we hope it will be at last decided that the means of defence were just and lawful.”</p>
			<p>When I read this to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burke, he was highly pleased, and exclaimed,<br/>
			“Well; he does his work in a workmanlike manner.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3044" id="noteref-3044" epub:type="noteref">3044</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-63"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomson wished to bring the cause by appeal before the House of Lords, but was dissuaded by the advice of the noble person who lately presided so ably in that Most Honourable House, and who was then Attorney-General. As my readers will no doubt be glad also to read the opinion of this eminent man upon the same subject, I shall here insert it.</p>
			<p>CASE. “There is herewith laid before you, 1. Petition for the Reverend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> James Thomson, minister of Dumfermline. 2. Answers thereto. 3. Copy of the judgement of the Court of Session upon both. 4. Notes of the opinions of the Judges, being the reasons upon which their decree is grounded. “These papers you will please to peruse, and give your opinion, Whether there is a probability of the above decree of the Court of Session’s being reversed, if <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomson should appeal from the same?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t think the appeal adviseable: not only because the value of the judgement is in no degree adequate to the expense; but because there are many chances, that upon the general complexion of the case, the impression will be taken to the disadvantage of the appellant.</p>
			<p>“It is impossible to approve the style of that sermon. But the <em>complaint</em> was not less ungracious from that man, who had behaved so ill by his original libel, and, at the time, when he received the reproach he complains of. In the last article, all the plaintiffs are equally concerned. It struck me also with some wonder, that the Judges should think so much fervour apposite to the occasion of reproving the defendant for a little excess.</p>
			<p>“Upon the matter, however, I agree with them in condemning the behaviour of the minister; and in thinking it a subject fit for ecclesiastical censure; and even for an action, if any individual could qualify<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3045" id="noteref-3045" epub:type="noteref">3045</a> a wrong, and a damage arising from it. But this I doubt. The circumstance of publishing the reproach in a pulpit, though extremely indecent, and culpable in another view, does not constitute a different sort of wrong, or any other rule of law, than would have <a id="III-page-64" />obtained, if the same words had been pronounced elsewhere. I don’t know whether there be any difference in the law of Scotland, in the definition of slander, before the Commissaries, or the Court of Session. The common law of England does not give way to actions for every reproachful word. An action cannot be brought for general damages, upon any words which import less than an offence cognisable by law; consequently no action could have been brought here for the words in question. Both laws admit the truth to be a justification in action <em>for words</em>; and the law of England does the same in actions for libels. The judgement, therefore, seems to me to have been wrong, in that the Court repelled that defence.</p>
			<p>’E. THURLOW.”</p>
			<p>I am now to record a very curious incident in <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s Life, which fell under my own observation; of which <i xml:lang="la">pars magna fui</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3046" id="noteref-3046" epub:type="noteref">3046</a> and which I am persuaded will, with the liberal-minded, be much to his credit.</p>
			<p>My desire of being acquainted with celebrated men of every description, had made me, much about the same time, obtain an introduction to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Samuel Johnson and to John Wilkes, <abbr>Esq.</abbr> Two men more different could perhaps not be selected out of all mankind. They had even attacked one another with some asperity<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3047" id="noteref-3047" epub:type="noteref">3047</a> in their writings; yet I lived in habits of friendship with both.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3048" id="noteref-3048" epub:type="noteref">3048</a> I could fully relish the excellence of each; for I have ever delighted in that intellectual chymistry, which can separate good qualities from evil in the same person.</p>
			<p id="III-page-65">Sir John Pringle, “mine own friend and my Father’s friend,” between whom and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson I in vain wished to establish an acquaintance,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3049" id="noteref-3049" epub:type="noteref">3049</a> as I respected and lived in intimacy with both of them, observed to me once, very ingeniously, “It is not in friendship as in mathematics, where two things, each equal to a third, are equal between themselves. You agree with Johnson as a middle quality, and you agree with me as a middle quality; but Johnson and I should not agree.” Sir John was not sufficiently flexible; so I desisted; knowing, indeed, that the repulsion was equally strong on the part of Johnson; who, I know not from what cause, unless his being a Scotchman, had formed a very erroneous opinion of Sir John. But I conceived an irresistible wish, if possible, to bring <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes together. How to manage it, was a nice and difficult matter.</p>
			<p>My worthy booksellers and friends, Messieurs Dilly in the Poultry,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3050" id="noteref-3050" epub:type="noteref">3050</a> at whose hospitable and well-covered table I have seen a greater number of literary men, than at any other, except that of Sir Joshua Reynolds, had invited me to meet <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes and some more gentlemen on Wednesday, May 15. “Pray (said I,) let us have <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson.”⁠—“What with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes? not for the world, (said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward Dilly:) <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson would never forgive me.”⁠—“Come, (said I,) if you’ll let me negotiate for you, I will be answerable that all shall go well.” DILLY. “Nay, if you will take it upon you, I am sure I shall be very happy to see them both here.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-66">Notwithstanding the high veneration which I entertained for <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, I was sensible that he was sometimes a little actuated by the spirit of contradiction, and by means of that I hoped I should gain my point. I was persuaded that if I had come upon him with a direct proposal, “Sir, will you dine in company with Jack Wilkes?” he would have flown into a passion, and would probably have answered, “Dine with Jack Wilkes, Sir! I’d as soon dine with Jack Ketch.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3051" id="noteref-3051" epub:type="noteref">3051</a>” I therefore, while we were sitting quietly, by ourselves at his house in an evening, took occasion to open my plan thus:⁠—“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly, Sir, sends his respectful compliments to you, and would be happy if you would do him the honour to dine with him on Wednesday next along with me, as I must soon go to Scotland.” JOHNSON. “Sir, I am obliged to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly. I will wait upon him⁠—“BOSWELL. “Provided, Sir, I suppose, that the company which he is to have, is agreeable to you.” JOHNSON. “What do you mean, Sir? What do you take me for? Do you think I am so ignorant of the world, as to imagine that I am to prescribe to a gentleman what company he is to have at his table?” BOSWELL. “I beg your pardon, Sir, for wishing to prevent you from meeting people whom you might not like. Perhaps he may have some of what he calls his patriotic friends with him.” JOHNSON. “Well, Sir, and what then? What care <em>I</em> for his <em>patriotic friends</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3052" id="noteref-3052" epub:type="noteref">3052</a>? Poh!” BOSWELL. “I should not be surprised to find Jack Wilkes there.” JOHNSON. “And if Jack Wilkes <em>should</em> be there, what is that to <em>me</em>, Sir? My dear friend, let us have no more of this. I am sorry to be angry with you; but really it is treating me strangely to talk to me as if I could not meet any company whatever, occasionally.” BOSWELL. “Pray forgive me, Sir: I meant well. But you shall meet whoever comes, for me.” Thus I secured him, and told Dilly that he would find him very well pleased to be one of his guests on the day appointed.</p>
			<p id="III-page-67">Upon the much-expected Wednesday, I called on him about half an hour before dinner, as I often did when we were to dine out together, to see that he was ready in time, and to accompany him. I found him buffeting his books, as upon a former occasion,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3053" id="noteref-3053" epub:type="noteref">3053</a> covered with dust, and making no preparation for going abroad. “How is this, Sir? (said I.) Don’t you recollect that you are to dine at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly’s?” JOHNSON. “Sir, I did not think of going to Dilly’s: it went out of my head. I have ordered dinner at home with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams.” BOSWELL, “But, my dear Sir, you know you were engaged to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly, and I told him so. He will expect you, and will be much disappointed if you don’t come.” JOHNSON. “You must talk to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams about this.”</p>
			<p>Here was a sad dilemma. I feared that what I was so confident I had secured would yet be frustrated. He had accustomed himself to show <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams such a degree of humane attention, as frequently imposed some restraint upon him; and I knew that if she should be obstinate, he would not stir. I hastened downstairs to the blind lady’s room, and told her I was in great uneasiness, for <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson had engaged to me to dine this day at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly’s, but that he had told me he had forgotten his engagement, and had ordered dinner at home. “Yes, Sir, (said she, pretty peevishly,) <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson is to dine at home,”⁠—“Madam, (said I,) his respect for you is such, that I know he will not leave you unless you absolutely desire it. But as you have so much of his company, I hope you will be good enough to forego it for a day; as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly is a very worthy man, has frequently had agreeable parties at his house for <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, and will be vexed if the Doctor neglects him today. And then, Madam, be pleased to consider my situation; I carried the message, and I assured <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson was to come, and no doubt he has made a dinner, and invited a company, and boasted of the honour he expected to have. I shall be quite disgraced if the Doctor is not there.” She gradually softened to my solicitations, which were certainly as earnest as most entreaties to ladies upon any occasion, and was graciously pleased to empower me to tell <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, “That all things considered she thought he should certainly go.” I flew back to him still in dust, and careless of what should be the event, “indifferent <a id="III-page-68" />in his choice to go or stay;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3054" id="noteref-3054" epub:type="noteref">3054</a>” but as soon as I had announced to him <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams’ consent, he roared, “Frank, a clean shirt,” and was very soon dressed. When I had him fairly seated in a hackney-coach with me, I exulted as much as a fortune-hunter who has got an heiress into a post-chaise with him to set out for Gretna-Green.</p>
			<p>When we entered <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly’s drawing room, he found himself in the midst of a company he did not know. I kept myself snug and silent, watching how he would conduct himself. I observed him whispering to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly, “Who is that gentleman, Sir?”⁠—“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Arthur Lee.”⁠—JOHNSON. “Too, too, too,” (under his breath,) which was one of his habitual mutterings.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3055" id="noteref-3055" epub:type="noteref">3055</a> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Arthur Lee could not but be very obnoxious to Johnson, for he was not only a <em>patriot</em> but an <em>American</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3056" id="noteref-3056" epub:type="noteref">3056</a> He was afterwards minister from the United States at the court of Madrid. “And who is the gentleman in lace?”⁠—“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes, Sir.” This information confounded him still more; he had some difficulty to restrain himself, and taking up a book, sat down upon a window-seat and read, or at least kept his eye upon it intently for some time, till he composed himself. His feelings, I dare say, were awkward enough. But he no doubt recollected his having rated me for supposing that he could be at all disconcerted by any company, and he, therefore, resolutely set himself to behave quite as an easy man of the world, who could adapt himself at once to the disposition and manners of those whom he might chance to meet.</p>
			<p>The cheering sound of “Dinner is upon the table,” dissolved his reverie, and we <em>all</em> sat down without any symptom of ill humour. There were present, beside <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Arthur Lee, who was an old companion of mine when he studied physic at Edinburgh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> (now Sir John) Miller, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lettsom, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Slater the druggist. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes placed himself next to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, and behaved to him with so much attention and politeness,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3057" id="noteref-3057" epub:type="noteref">3057</a> that he gained upon him insensibly. No man eat <a id="III-page-69" />more heartily than Johnson, or loved better what was nice and delicate. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes was very assiduous in helping him to some fine veal. “Pray give me leave, Sir:⁠—It is better here⁠—A little of the brown⁠—Some fat, Sir⁠—A little of the stuffing⁠—Some gravy⁠—Let me have the pleasure of giving you some butter⁠—Allow me to recommend a squeeze of this orange;⁠—or the lemon, perhaps, may have more zest.”⁠—“Sir, Sir, I am obliged to you, Sir,” cried Johnson, bowing, and turning⁠—his head to him with a look for some time of “surly virtue,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3058" id="noteref-3058" epub:type="noteref">3058</a> but, in a short while, of complacency.</p>
			<p>Foote being mentioned, Johnson said. “He is not a good mimic.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3059" id="noteref-3059" epub:type="noteref">3059</a>” One of the company added, “A merry Andrew, a buffoon.” JOHNSON. “But he has wit too, and is not deficient in ideas, or in fertility and variety of imagery, and not empty of reading; he has knowledge enough to fill up his part. One species of wit he has in an eminent degree, that of escape. You drive him into a corner with both hands; but he’s gone, Sir, when you think you have got him⁠—like an animal that jumps over your head. Then he has a great range for wit; he never lets truth stand between him and a jest, and he is sometimes mighty coarse. Garrick is under many restraints from which Foote is free.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3060" id="noteref-3060" epub:type="noteref">3060</a>” WILKES. “Garrick’s wit is more like Lord Chesterfield’s.” JOHNSON. “The first time I was in company with Foote was at Fitzherbert’s. Having no good opinion of the fellow, I was resolved not to be pleased; and it is very difficult to please a man against his will.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3061" id="noteref-3061" epub:type="noteref">3061</a> I went on eating my dinner pretty sullenly, affecting not to mind him. But the dog was so very comical, that I was obliged to lay down my knife and fork, throw myself back upon my chair, and fairly <a id="III-page-70" />laugh it out. No, Sir, he was irresistible.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3062" id="noteref-3062" epub:type="noteref">3062</a> He upon one occasion experienced, in an extraordinary degree, the efficacy of his powers of entertaining. Amongst the many and various modes which he tried of getting money, he became a partner with a small-beer brewer, and he was to have a share of the profits for procuring customers amongst his numerous acquaintance. Fitzherbert was one who took his small-beer; but it was so bad that the servants resolved not to drink it. They were at some loss how to notify their resolution, being afraid of offending their master, who they knew liked Foote much as a companion. At last they fixed upon a little black boy, who was rather a favourite, to be their deputy, and deliver their remonstrance; and having invested him with the whole authority of the kitchen, he was to inform <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fitzherbert, in all their names, upon a certain day, that they would drink Foote’s small-beer no longer. On that day Foote happened to dine at Fitzherbert’s, and this boy served at table; he was so delighted with Foote’s stories, and merriment, and grimace, that when he went downstairs, he told them, ‘This is the finest man I have ever seen. I will not deliver your message. I will drink his small-beer.’ ”</p>
			<p>Somebody observed that Garrick could not have done this. WILKES. “Garrick would have made the small-beer still smaller. He is now leaving the stage; but he will play <em>Scrub</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3063" id="noteref-3063" epub:type="noteref">3063</a> all his life.” I knew that Johnson would let nobody attack Garrick but himself,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3064" id="noteref-3064" epub:type="noteref">3064</a> as Garrick once said to me, and I had heard him praise his liberality; so to bring out his commendation of his celebrated pupil, I said, loudly, “I have heard Garrick is liberal.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3065" id="noteref-3065" epub:type="noteref">3065</a>” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir, I know that Garrick has given away more money than any man in England that I am acquainted with, and that not from ostentatious views. Garrick was very poor when he began life; so when he came to have money, he <a id="III-page-71" />probably was very unskilful in giving away, and saved when he should not. But Garrick began to be liberal as soon as he could; and I am of opinion, the reputation of avarice which he has had, has been very lucky for him, and prevented his having many enemies. You despise a man for avarice, but do not hate him. Garrick might have been much better attacked for living with more splendour than is suitable to a player:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3066" id="noteref-3066" epub:type="noteref">3066</a> if they had had the wit to have assaulted him in that quarter, they might have galled him more. But they have kept clamouring about his avarice, which has rescued him from much obloquy and envy.”</p>
			<p>Talking of the great difficulty of obtaining authentic information for biography,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3067" id="noteref-3067" epub:type="noteref">3067</a> Johnson told us, “When I was a young fellow I wanted to write the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Dryden</i>, and in order to get materials, I applied to the only two persons then alive who had seen him;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3068" id="noteref-3068" epub:type="noteref">3068</a> these were old Swinney<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3069" id="noteref-3069" epub:type="noteref">3069</a> and old Cibber. Swinney’s information was no more than this, ‘That at Will’s coffeehouse Dryden had a particular chair for himself, which was set by the fire in winter, and was then called his winter-chair; and that it was carried out for him to the balcony in summer, and was then called his summer-chair.’ Cibber could tell no more but ‘That he remembered him a decent old man, arbiter of critical disputes at Will’s.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3070" id="noteref-3070" epub:type="noteref">3070</a>’ You are to consider that <a id="III-page-72" />Cibber was then at a great distance from Dryden, had perhaps one leg only in the room, and durst not draw in the other.” BOSWELL. “Yet Cibber was a man of observation?” JOHNSON. “I think not.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3071" id="noteref-3071" epub:type="noteref">3071</a> BOSWELL. “You will allow his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Apology</i> to be well done.” JOHNSON. “Very well done, to be sure, Sir.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3072" id="noteref-3072" epub:type="noteref">3072</a> That book is a striking proof of the justice of Pope’s remark:</p>
			<p>‘Each might his several province well command,<br/>
			Would all but stoop to what they understand.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3073" id="noteref-3073" epub:type="noteref">3073</a>’</p>
			<p>BOSWELL. “And his plays are good.” JOHNSON. “Yes; but that was his trade; <i>l’esprit du corps</i>; he had been all his life among players and play-writers.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3074" id="noteref-3074" epub:type="noteref">3074</a> I wondered that he had so little to say in conversation, for he had kept the best company, and learnt all that can be got by the ear. He abused Pindar to me, and then showed me an Ode of his own, with an absurd <a id="III-page-73" />couplet, making a linnet soar on an eagle’s wing.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3075" id="noteref-3075" epub:type="noteref">3075</a> I told him that when the ancients made a simile, they always made it like something real.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes remarked, that “among all the bold flights of Shakespeare’s imagination, the boldest was making Birnamwood march to Dunsinane; creating a wood where there never was a shrub; a wood in Scotland! ha! ha! ha!” And he also observed, that “the clannish slavery of the Highlands of Scotland was the single exception to Milton’s remark of ‘The Mountain Nymph, sweet Liberty,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3076" id="noteref-3076" epub:type="noteref">3076</a>’ being worshipped in all hilly countries.”⁠—“When I was at Inverary (said he,) on a visit to my old friend, Archibald, Duke of Argyle, his dependents congratulated me on being such a favourite of his Grace. I said, ‘It is then, gentlemen, truely lucky for me; for if I had displeased the Duke, and he had wished it, there is not a Campbell among you but would have been ready to bring John Wilkes’s head to him in a charger. It would have been only</p>
			<p>“ ‘ “Off with his head! So much for Aylesbury.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3077" id="noteref-3077" epub:type="noteref">3077</a>” ’</p>
			<p>“I was then member for Aylesbury.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes talked of the contested passage in Horace’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Art of Poetry</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3078" id="noteref-3078" epub:type="noteref">3078</a> “<i xml:lang="fr">Difficile est propriè communia dicere.</i>” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes according to my note, gave the interpretation thus; “It is difficult to speak with propriety of common things; as, if a poet had to speak of Queen Caroline drinking tea, he must endeavour to avoid the vulgarity of cups and saucers.” But upon reading my note, he tells me that he meant to say, that “the word <i xml:lang="la">communia</i>, being a Roman law term, signifies here things <i xml:lang="la">communis juris</i>, that is to say, what have never yet been treated by anybody; and this appears clearly from what followed,</p>
			<p>‘⁠—Tuque<br/>
			Rectiùs Iliacum carmen deducis in actus<br/>
			Quàm si proferres ignota indictaque primus.’</p>
			<p id="III-page-74">“You will easier make a tragedy out of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Iliad</i> than on any subject not handled before.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3079" id="noteref-3079" epub:type="noteref">3079</a>” JOHNSON. “He means that it is <a id="III-page-75" />difficult to appropriate to particular persons qualities which are common to all mankind, as Homer has done.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-76">WILKES. “We have no City-Poet now: that is an office which has gone into disuse. The last was Elkanah Settle. There is something in <em>names</em> which one cannot help feeling. Now <q>Elkanah Settle</q> sounds so <em>queer</em>, who can expect much from that name? We should have no hesitation to give it for John Dryden, in preference to Elkanah Settle, from the names only, without knowing their different merits.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3080" id="noteref-3080" epub:type="noteref">3080</a>” JOHNSON. “I suppose, Sir, Settle did as well for Aldermen in his time, as John Home could do now. Where did Beckford and Trecothick learn English<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3081" id="noteref-3081" epub:type="noteref">3081</a>?”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Arthur Lee mentioned some Scotch who had taken possession of a barren part of America, and wondered why they should choose it. JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, all barrenness is comparative. The <em>Scotch</em> would not know it to be barren.” <a id="III-page-77" />BOSWELL. “Come, come, he is flattering the English. You have now been in Scotland, Sir, and say if you did not see meat and drink enough there.” JOHNSON. “Why yes, Sir; meat and drink enough to give the inhabitants sufficient strength to run away from home.” All these quick and lively sallies were said sportively, quite in jest, and with a smile, which showed that he meant only wit. Upon this topic he and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes could perfectly assimilate; here was a bond of union between them, and I was conscious that as both of them had visited Caledonia, both were fully satisfied of the strange narrow ignorance of those who imagine that it is a land of famine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3082" id="noteref-3082" epub:type="noteref">3082</a> But they amused themselves with persevering in the old jokes. When I claimed a superiority for Scotland over England in one respect, that no man can be arrested there for a debt merely because another swears it against him; but there must first be the judgement of a court of law ascertaining its justice; and that a seizure of the person, before judgement is obtained, can take place only, if his creditor should swear that he is about to fly from the country, or, as it is technically expressed, is <i xml:lang="la">in meditatione fugae</i>: WILKES. “That, I should think, may be safely sworn of all the Scotch nation.” JOHNSON. (to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes) “You must know, Sir, I lately took my friend Boswell and showed him genuine civilised life in an English provincial town. I turned him loose at Lichfield, my native city, that he might see for once real civility:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3083" id="noteref-3083" epub:type="noteref">3083</a> for you know he lives among savages in Scotland, and among rakes in London.” WILKES. “Except when he is with grave, sober, decent people like you and me.” JOHNSON, (smiling) “And we ashamed of him.”</p>
			<p>They were quite frank and easy. Johnson told the story<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3084" id="noteref-3084" epub:type="noteref">3084</a> of his asking <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Macaulay to allow her footman to sit down <a id="III-page-78" />with them, to prove the ridiculousness of the argument for the equality of mankind; and he said to me afterwards, with a nod of satisfaction, “You saw <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes acquiesced.” Wilkes talked with all imaginable freedom of the ludicrous title given to the Attorney-General, <q>Diabolus Regis</q>; adding, “I have reason to know something about that officer; for I was prosecuted for a libel.” Johnson, who many people would have supposed must have been furiously angry at hearing this talked of so lightly, said not a word. He was now, <em>indeed</em>, “a good-humoured fellow.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3085" id="noteref-3085" epub:type="noteref">3085</a></p>
			<p>After dinner we had an accession of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knowles,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3086" id="noteref-3086" epub:type="noteref">3086</a> the Quaker lady, well known for her various talents, and of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Alderman Lee. Amidst some patriotic groans, somebody (I think the Alderman) said, “Poor old England is lost.” JOHNSON. “Sir, it is not so much to be lamented that Old England is lost, as that the Scotch have found it.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3087" id="noteref-3087" epub:type="noteref">3087</a> WILKES. “Had Lord Bute governed Scotland only, I should not have taken the trouble to write his eulogy, and dedicate <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mortimer</i> to him.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3088" id="noteref-3088" epub:type="noteref">3088</a></p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes held a candle to show a fine print of a beautiful female figure which hung in the room, and pointed out the elegant contour of the bosom with the finger of an arch connoisseur. He afterwards, in a conversation with me, waggishly insisted, that all the time Johnson showed visible signs of a fervent admiration of the corresponding charms of the fair Quaker.</p>
			<p>This record, though by no means so perfect as I could wish, will serve to give a notion of a very curious interview, which was not only pleasing at the time, but had the agreeable and benignant effect of reconciling any animosity, and sweetening any acidity, which in the various bustle of political contest, had <a id="III-page-79" />been produced in the minds of two men, who though widely different, had so many things in common⁠—classical learning, modern literature, wit, and humour, and ready repartee⁠—that it would have been much to be regretted if they had been forever at a distance from each other.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3089" id="noteref-3089" epub:type="noteref">3089</a></p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burke gave me much credit for this successful <em>negotiation</em>; and pleasantly said, that “there was nothing to equal it in the whole history of the <i>Corps Diplomatique</i>“.</p>
			<p>I attended <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson home, and had the satisfaction to hear him tell <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams how much he had been pleased with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes’s company, and what an agreeable day he had passed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3090" id="noteref-3090" epub:type="noteref">3090</a></p>
			<p>I talked a good deal to him of the celebrated Margaret Caroline Rudd, whom I had visited, induced by the fame of her talents, address, and irresistible power of fascination.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3091" id="noteref-3091" epub:type="noteref">3091</a> To a lady who disapproved of my visiting her, he said on a former occasion,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3092" id="noteref-3092" epub:type="noteref">3092</a> “Nay, Madam, Boswell is in the right; I should have visited her myself, were it not that they have now a trick of putting everything into the newspapers.” This evening he exclaimed, “I envy him his acquaintance with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rudd.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-80">I mentioned a scheme which I had of making a tour to the Isle of Man, and giving a full account of it; and that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burke had playfully suggested as a motto,</p>
			<p>“The proper study of mankind is MAN.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3093" id="noteref-3093" epub:type="noteref">3093</a></p>
			<p>JOHNSON. “Sir, you will get more by the book than the jaunt will cost you; so you will have your diversion for nothing, and add to your reputation.”</p>
			<p>On the evening of the next day I took leave of him, being to set out for Scotland.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3094" id="noteref-3094" epub:type="noteref">3094</a> I thanked him with great warmth for all his kindness. “Sir, (said he,) you are very welcome. Nobody repays it with more.”</p>
			<p>How very false is the notion which has gone round the world of the rough, and passionate, and harsh manners of this great and good man. That he had occasional sallies of heat of temper, and that he was sometimes, perhaps, too “easily provoked<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3095" id="noteref-3095" epub:type="noteref">3095</a>” by absurdity and folly, and sometimes too desirous of triumph in colloquial contest, must be allowed. The quickness both of his perception and sensibility disposed him to sudden explosions of satire; to which his extraordinary readiness of wit was a strong and almost irresistible incitement. To adopt one of the finest images in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Home’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Douglas</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3096" id="noteref-3096" epub:type="noteref">3096</a></p>
			<p>“On each glance of thought<br/>
			Decision followed, as the thunderbolt<br/>
			Pursues the flash!”</p>
			<p id="III-page-81">I admit that the beadle within him was often so eager to apply the lash, that the Judge had not time to consider the case with sufficient deliberation.</p>
			<p>That he was occasionally remarkable for violence of temper may be granted: but let us ascertain the degree, and not let it be supposed that he was in a perpetual rage, and never without a club in his hand, to knock down everyone who approached him. On the contrary, the truth is, that by much the greatest part of his time he was civil, obliging, nay, polite in the true sense of the word; so much so, that many gentlemen, who were long acquainted with him, never received, or even heard a strong expression from him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3097" id="noteref-3097" epub:type="noteref">3097</a></p>
			<p>The following letters concerning an Epitaph which he wrote for the monument of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Goldsmith, in Westminster-Abbey, afford at once a proof of his unaffected modesty, his carelessness as to his own writings, and of the great respect which he entertained for the taste and judgement of the excellent and eminent person to whom they are addressed:</p>
			<p>“TO SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I have been kept away from you, I know not well how, and of these vexatious hindrances I know not when there will be an end. I therefore send you the poor dear Doctor’s epitaph. Read it first yourself; and if you then think it right, show it to the Club. I am, you know, willing to be corrected. If you think anything much amiss, keep it to yourself, till we come together. I have sent two copies, but prefer the card. The dates must be settled by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy.</p>
			<p>“I am, Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“May 16, 1776.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-82">TO THE SAME.</p>
			<p>“SIR,</p>
			<p>“Miss Reynolds has a mind to send the Epitaph to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Beattie; I am very willing, but having no copy, cannot immediately recollect it. She tells me you have lost it. Try to recollect and put down as much as you retain; you perhaps may have kept what I have dropped. The lines for which I am at a loss are something of <i xml:lang="la">rerum civilium sivè naturalium</i>.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3098" id="noteref-3098" epub:type="noteref">3098</a> It was a sorry trick to lose it; help me if you can. I am, Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“June 22, 1776.</p>
			<p>“The gout grows better but slowly.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3099" id="noteref-3099" epub:type="noteref">3099</a>”</p>
			<p>It was, I think, after I had left London this year, that this Epitaph gave occasion to a <em>Remonstrance</em> to the MONARCH OF LITERATURE, for an account of which I am indebted to Sir William Forbes, of Pitsligo.</p>
			<p>That my readers may have the subject more fully and clearly before them,<br/>
			I shall first insert the Epitaph.</p>
			<p>OLIVARII GOLDSMITH,<br/>
			_Poetae, Physici, Historici,<br/>
			Qui nullum ferè scribendi genus<br/>
			Non tetigit,<br/>
			Nullum quod tetigit non ornavit.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3100" id="noteref-3100" epub:type="noteref">3100</a><br/>
			<a id="III-page-83" />Sive risus essent movendi,<br/>
			Sive lacrymae,<br/>
			Affectuum potens at lenis dominator:<br/>
			Ingenio sublimis, vividus, versatilis,<br/>
			Oratione grandis, nitidus, venustus:<br/>
			Hoc monumento memoriam coluit<br/>
			Sodalium amor,<br/>
			Amicorum fides,<br/>
			Lectorum veneratio.<br/>
			Natus in Hiberniâ Forniae Longfordiensis,<br/>
			In loco cui nomen Pallas,<br/>
			<abbr>Nov.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span> MDCCXXXI;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3101" id="noteref-3101" epub:type="noteref">3101</a><br/>
			Eblanae literis institutus;<br/>
			Obiit Londini,<br/>
			April <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, MDCCLXXIV.”</p>
			<p>Sir William Forbes writes to me thus:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I enclose the <em>Round Robin</em>. This <i xml:lang="fr">jeu d’esprit</i> took its rise one day at dinner at our friend Sir Joshua Reynolds’s.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3102" id="noteref-3102" epub:type="noteref">3102</a> All the company present, except myself, were friends and acquaintance of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Goldsmith.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3103" id="noteref-3103" epub:type="noteref">3103</a> The Epitaph, written for him by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, <a id="III-page-84" />became the subject of conversation, and various emendations were suggested, which it was agreed should be submitted to the Doctor’s consideration. But the question was, who should have the courage to propose them to him? At last it was hinted, that there could be no way so good as that of a <q>Round Robin</q>, as the sailors call it, which they make use of when they enter into a conspiracy, so as not to let it be known who puts his name first or last to the paper. This proposition was instantly assented to; and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Barnard, Dean of Derry, now Bishop of Killaloe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3104" id="noteref-3104" epub:type="noteref">3104</a> drew up an address to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson on the occasion, replete with wit and humour, but which it was feared the Doctor might think treated the subject with too much levity. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burke then proposed the address as it stands in the paper in writing, to which I had the honour to officiate as clerk.</p>
			<p>“Sir Joshua agreed to carry it to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, who received it with much good humour,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3105" id="noteref-3105" epub:type="noteref">3105</a> and desired Sir Joshua to tell the gentlemen, <a id="III-page-85" />that he would alter the Epitaph in any manner they pleased, as to the sense of it; but <q>he would never consent to disgrace the walls of Westminster Abbey</q> with an English inscription.</p>
			<p>“I consider this <em>Round Robin</em> as a species of literary curiosity worth preserving, as it marks, in a certain degree, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s character.”</p>
			<p>My readers are presented with a faithful transcript of a paper, which I doubt not of their being desirous to see.</p>
			<p>Sir William Forbes’s observation is very just. The anecdote now related proves, in the strongest manner, the reverence and awe with which Johnson was regarded, by some of the most eminent men of his time, in various departments, and even by such of them as lived most with him; while it also confirms what I have again and again inculcated, that he was by no means of that ferocious and irascible character which has been ignorantly imagined.</p>
			<p>This hasty composition is also to be remarked as one of a thousand instances which evince the extraordinary promptitude of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burke; who while he is equal to the greatest things, can adorn the least; can, with equal facility, embrace the vast and complicated speculations of politics, or the ingenious topics of literary investigation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3106" id="noteref-3106" epub:type="noteref">3106</a></p>
			<p>“DR. JOHNSON TO MRS. BOSWELL.</p>
			<p>“MADAM,</p>
			<p>“You must not think me uncivil in omitting to answer the letter with which you favoured me some time ago. I imagined it to have been written without <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boswell’s knowledge, and therefore supposed the answer to require, what I could not find, a private conveyance.</p>
			<p id="III-page-86">“The difference with Lord Auchinleck is now over; and since young Alexander<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3107" id="noteref-3107" epub:type="noteref">3107</a> has appeared, I hope no more difficulties will arise among you; for I sincerely wish you all happy. Do not teach the young ones to dislike me, as you dislike me yourself; but let me at least have Veronica’s kindness, because she is my acquaintance.</p>
			<p>“You will now have <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boswell home; it is well that you have him; he has led a wild life. I have taken him to Lichfield, and he has followed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale to Bath. Pray take care of him, and tame him. The only thing in which I have the honour to agree with you is, in loving him; and while we are so much of a mind in a matter of so much importance, our other quarrels will, I hope, produce no great bitterness. I am, Madam,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“May 16, 1776.”</p>
			<p>“MR. BOSWELL TO DR. JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, June 25, 1776.</p>
			<p>“You have formerly complained that my letters were too long. There is no danger of that complaint being made at present; for I find it difficult for me to write to you at all. [Here an account of having been afflicted with a return of melancholy <a id="III-page-87" />or bad spirits.]</p>
			<p>“The boxes of books<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3108" id="noteref-3108" epub:type="noteref">3108</a> which you sent to me are arrived; but I have not yet examined the contents.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“I send you <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Maclaurin’s paper for the negro, who claims his freedom in the Court of Session.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3109" id="noteref-3109" epub:type="noteref">3109</a>’</p>
			<p>“DR. JOHNSON TO MR. BOSWELL.</p>
			<p>“Dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“These black fits, of which you complain, perhaps hurt your memory as well as your imagination. When did I complain that your letters were too long<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3110" id="noteref-3110" epub:type="noteref">3110</a>? Your last letter, after a very long delay, brought very bad news. [Here a series of reflections upon melancholy, <a id="III-page-87" />and⁠—what I could not help thinking strangely unreasonable in him who had suffered so much from it himself⁠—a good deal of severity and reproof, as if it were owing to my own fault, or that I was, perhaps, affecting it from a desire of distinction.]</p>
			<p>“Read Cheyne’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">English Malady</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3111" id="noteref-3111" epub:type="noteref">3111</a> but do not let him teach you a foolish notion that melancholy is a proof of acuteness.</p>
			<p>“To hear that you have not opened your boxes of books is very offensive. The examination and arrangement of so many volumes might have afforded you an amusement very seasonable at present, and useful for the whole of life. I am, I confess, very angry that you manage yourself so ill.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3112" id="noteref-3112" epub:type="noteref">3112</a></p>
			<p>“I do not now say any more, than that I am, with great kindness, and sincerity, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your humble servant,<br/>
			“SAM. JOHNSON.”<br/>
			“July 2, 1776.”</p>
			<p>“It was last year<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3113" id="noteref-3113" epub:type="noteref">3113</a> determined by Lord Mansfield, in the Court of King’s Bench, that a negro cannot be taken out of the kingdom without his own consent.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-88">“DR. JOHNSON TO MR. BOSWELL.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I make haste to write again, lest my last letter should give you too much pain. If you are really oppressed with overpowering and involuntary melancholy, you are to be pitied rather than reproached.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“Now, my dear Bozzy, let us have done with quarrels and with censure. Let me know whether I have not sent you a pretty library. There are, perhaps, many books among them which you never need read through; but there are none which it is not proper for you to know, and sometimes to consult. Of these books, of which the use is only occasional, it is often sufficient to know the contents, that, when any question arises, you may know where to look for information.</p>
			<p>“Since I wrote, I have looked over <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Maclaurin’s plea, and think it excellent. How is the suit carried on? If by subscription, I commission you to contribute, in my name, what is proper. Let nothing be wanting in such a case. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Drummond,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3114" id="noteref-3114" epub:type="noteref">3114</a> I see, is superseded. His father would have grieved; but he lived to obtain the pleasure of his son’s election, and died before that pleasure was abated.</p>
			<p id="III-page-89">“Langton’s lady has brought him a girl, and both are well; I dined with him the other day.</p>
			<p>“It vexes me to tell you, that on the evening of the 29th of May I was seized by the gout, and am not quite well. The pain has not been violent, but the weakness and tenderness were very troublesome, and what is said to be very uncommon, it has not alleviated my other disorders. Make use of youth and health while you have them; make my compliments to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell. I am, my dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most affectionate</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“July 6,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3115" id="noteref-3115" epub:type="noteref">3115</a> 1776.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> BOSWELL TO DR. JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, July 18, 1776.</p>
			<p>“MY DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“Your letter of the second of this month was rather a harsh medicine; but I was delighted with that spontaneous tenderness, which, a few days afterwards, sent forth such balsam as your next brought me. I found myself for some time so ill that all I could do was to preserve a decent appearance, while all within was weakness and distress. Like a reduced garrison that has some spirit left, I hung out flags, and planted all the force I could muster, upon the walls. I am now much better, and I sincerely thank you for your kind attention and friendly counsel.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“Count Manucci<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3116" id="noteref-3116" epub:type="noteref">3116</a> came here last week from travelling in Ireland. I have shown him what civilities I could on his own account, on yours, and on that of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale. He has had a fall from his horse, and been much hurt. I regret this unlucky accident, for he seems to be a very amiable man.”</p>
			<p>As the evidence of what I have mentioned at the beginning of this year,<br/>
			I select from his private register the following passage:</p>
			<p id="III-page-90">“July 25, 1776. O GOD, who hast ordained that whatever is to be desired should be sought by labour, and who, by thy blessing, bringest honest labour to good effect, look with mercy upon my studies and endeavours. Grant me, O LORD, to design only what is lawful and right; and afford me calmness of mind, and steadiness of purpose, that I may so do thy will in this short life, as to obtain happiness in the world to come, for the sake of JESUS CHRIST our Lord. Amen.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3117" id="noteref-3117" epub:type="noteref">3117</a></p>
			<p>It appears from a note subjoined, that this was composed when he “purposed to apply vigorously to study, particularly of the Greek and Italian tongues.”</p>
			<p>Such a purpose, so expressed, at the age of sixty-seven, is admirable and encouraging; and it must impress all the thinking part of my readers with a consolatory confidence in habitual devotion, when they see a man of such enlarged intellectual powers as Johnson, thus in the genuine earnestness of secrecy, imploring the aid of that Supreme Being, “from whom cometh down every good and every perfect gift.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3118" id="noteref-3118" epub:type="noteref">3118</a>”</p>
			<p>“TO SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS.</p>
			<p>“SIR,</p>
			<p>“A young man, whose name is Paterson, offers himself this evening to the Academy. He is the son of a man<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3119" id="noteref-3119" epub:type="noteref">3119</a> for whom I have long had a kindness, and who is now abroad in distress. I shall be glad that you will be pleased to show him any little countenance, or pay him any small distinction. How much it is in your power to favour or to forward a young man I do not know; nor do I know how much this candidate deserves favour by his personal merit, or what hopes his proficiency may now give of future eminence. I recommend him as the son of my friend. Your character and station enable you to give a young man great encouragement by very easy means. You have heard of a man who asked no other favour of Sir Robert Walpole, than that he would bow to him at his levee.</p>
			<p>“I am, Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Aug.</abbr> 3, 1776.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-91">“MR. BOSWELL TO DR. JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, August 30, 1776.</p>
			<p>[After giving him an account of my having examined the chests of books which he had sent to me, and which contained what may be truely called a numerous and miscellaneous <em>Stall Library</em>, thrown together at random:⁠—]</p>
			<p>“Lord Hailes was against the decree in the case of my client, the minister;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3120" id="noteref-3120" epub:type="noteref">3120</a> not that he justified the minister, but because the parishioner both provoked and retorted. I sent his Lordship your able argument upon the case for his perusal. His observation upon it in a letter to me was, ‘<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Suasorium</i> is pleasantly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3121" id="noteref-3121" epub:type="noteref">3121</a> and artfully composed. I suspect, however, that he has not convinced himself; for, I believe that he is better read in ecclesiastical history, than to imagine that a Bishop or a Presbyter has a right to begin censure or discipline <i xml:lang="la">è cathedrá</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3122" id="noteref-3122" epub:type="noteref">3122</a>’</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“For the honour of Count Manucci, as well as to observe that exactness of truth which you have taught me, I must correct what I said in a former letter. He did not fall from his horse, which might have been an imputation on his skill as an officer of cavalry; his horse fell with him.</p>
			<p>“I have, since I saw you, read every word of Granger’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Biographical History</i>. It has entertained me exceedingly, and I do not think him the <em>Whig</em> that you supposed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3123" id="noteref-3123" epub:type="noteref">3123</a> Horace Walpole’s being his patron<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3124" id="noteref-3124" epub:type="noteref">3124</a> is, indeed, no good sign of his political principles. But he denied to Lord Mountstuart that he was a Whig, and said he had been accused by both parties of partiality. It seems he was like Pope,</p>
			<p>‘While Tories call me Whig, and Whigs a Tory.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3125" id="noteref-3125" epub:type="noteref">3125</a>’</p>
			<p id="III-page-92">“I wish you would look more into his book; and as Lord Mountstuart wishes much to find a proper person to continue the work upon Granger’s plan, and has desired I would mention it to you; if such a man occurs, please to let me know. His Lordship will give him generous encouragement.”</p>
			<p>“TO MR. ROBERT LEVETT.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“Having spent about six weeks at this place, we have at length resolved upon returning. I expect to see you all in Fleet-street on the 30th of this month.</p>
			<p>“I did not go into the sea till last Friday,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3126" id="noteref-3126" epub:type="noteref">3126</a> but think to go most of this week, though I know not that it does me any good. My nights are very restless and tiresome, but I am otherwise well.</p>
			<p>“I have written word of my coming to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams. Remember me kindly to Francis and Betsy. I am, Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3127" id="noteref-3127" epub:type="noteref">3127</a>”</p>
			<p>“Brighthelmstone,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3128" id="noteref-3128" epub:type="noteref">3128</a> <abbr>Oct.</abbr> 21, 1776’</p>
			<p id="III-page-93">I again wrote to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson on the 21st of October, informing him, that my father had, in the most liberal manner, paid a large debt for me,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3129" id="noteref-3129" epub:type="noteref">3129</a> and that I had now the happiness of being upon very good terms with him; to which he returned the following answer.</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I had great pleasure in hearing that you are at last on good terms with your father.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3130" id="noteref-3130" epub:type="noteref">3130</a> Cultivate his kindness by all honest and manly means. Life is but short; no time can be afforded but for the indulgence of real sorrow, or contests upon questions seriously momentous. Let us not throw away any of our days upon useless resentment, or contend who shall hold out longest in stubborn malignity. It is best not to be angry; and best, in the next place, to be quickly reconciled. May you and your father pass the remainder of your time in reciprocal benevolence!</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“Do you ever hear from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton? I visit him sometimes, but he does not talk. I do not like his scheme of life;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3131" id="noteref-3131" epub:type="noteref">3131</a> but as I am not permitted to understand it, I cannot set anything right that is wrong. His children are sweet babies.</p>
			<p>“I hope my irreconcileable enemy, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell, is well. Desire her not to transmit her malevolence to the young people. Let me have Alexander, and Veronica, and Euphemia, for my friends.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams, whom you may reckon as one of your well-wishers, is in a feeble and languishing state, with little hope of growing better. She went for some part of the autumn into the country, but is little benefited; and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lawrence confesses that his art is at an end. Death is, however, at a distance; and what more than that can we say of ourselves? I am sorry for her pain, and more sorry for her decay. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Levett is sound, wind and limb.</p>
			<p>“I was some weeks this autumn at Brighthelmstone. The place was very dull, and I was not well; the expedition to the Hebrides was the <a id="III-page-94" />most pleasant journey that I ever made.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3132" id="noteref-3132" epub:type="noteref">3132</a> Such an effort annually would give the world a little diversification.</p>
			<p>“Every year, however, we cannot wander, and must therefore endeavour to spend our time at home as well as we can. I believe it is best to throw life into a method, that every hour may bring its employment, and every employment have its hour. Xenophon observes, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Treatise of Oeconomy</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3133" id="noteref-3133" epub:type="noteref">3133</a> that if everything be kept in a certain place, when anything is worn out or consumed, the vacuity which it leaves will show what is wanting; so if every part of time has its duty, the hour will call into remembrance its proper engagement.</p>
			<p>“I have not practised all this prudence myself, but I have suffered much for want of it; and I would have you, by timely recollection and steady resolution, escape from those evils which have lain heavy upon me.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3134" id="noteref-3134" epub:type="noteref">3134</a> I am, my dearest Boswell,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“Bolt-court, <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 16, 1776.”</p>
			<p>On the 16th of November I informed him that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan had sent me <em>twelve</em> copies of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey to the Western Islands</i>, handsomely bound, instead of the <em>twenty</em> copies which were stipulated;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3135" id="noteref-3135" epub:type="noteref">3135</a> but which, I supposed, were to be only in sheets; requested to know how they should be distributed: and mentioned that I had another son born to me, who was named David, and was a sickly infant.</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I have been for some time ill of a cold, which, perhaps, I made an excuse to myself for not writing, when in reality I knew not what to say.</p>
			<p id="III-page-95">“The books you must at last distribute as you think best, in my name, or your own, as you are inclined, or as you judge most proper. Everybody cannot be obliged; but I wish that nobody may be offended. Do the best you can.</p>
			<p>“I congratulate you on the increase of your family, and hope that little David is by this time well, and his mamma perfectly recovered. I am much pleased to hear of the reestablishment of kindness between you and your father. Cultivate his paternal tenderness as much as you can. To live at variance at all is uncomfortable; and variance with a father is still more uncomfortable. Besides that, in the whole dispute you have the wrong side; at least you gave the first provocations, and some of them very offensive.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3136" id="noteref-3136" epub:type="noteref">3136</a> Let it now be all over. As you have no reason to think that your new mother has shown you any foul play, treat her with respect, and with some degree of confidence; this will secure your father. When once a discordant family has felt the pleasure of peace, they will not willingly lose it. If <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell would but be friends with me, we might now shut the temple of Janus.</p>
			<p>“What came of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Memis’s cause<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3137" id="noteref-3137" epub:type="noteref">3137</a>? Is the question about the negro determined<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3138" id="noteref-3138" epub:type="noteref">3138</a>? Has Sir Allan any reasonable hopes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3139" id="noteref-3139" epub:type="noteref">3139</a>? What is become of poor Macquarry<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3140" id="noteref-3140" epub:type="noteref">3140</a>? Let me know the event of all these litigations. I wish particularly well to the negro and Sir Allan.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams has been much out of order; and though she is something better, is likely, in her physician’s opinion, to endure her malady for life, though she may, perhaps, die of some other. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale is big, and fancies that she carries a boy; if it were very reasonable to wish much about it, I should wish her not to be disappointed. The desire of male heirs is not appendant only to feudal tenures. A son is almost necessary to the continuance of Thrale’s fortune; for what can misses do with a brewhouse? Lands are fitter for daughters than trades.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3141" id="noteref-3141" epub:type="noteref">3141</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-96">“Baretti went away from Thrale’s in some whimsical fit of disgust, or ill-nature, without taking any leave.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3142" id="noteref-3142" epub:type="noteref">3142</a> It is well if he finds in any other place as good an habitation, and as many conveniencies. He has got five-and-twenty guineas by translating Sir Joshua’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Discourses</i> <a id="III-page-97" />into Italian, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale gave him an hundred in the spring;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3143" id="noteref-3143" epub:type="noteref">3143</a> so that he is yet in no difficulties.</p>
			<p>“Colman has bought Foote’s patent, and is to allow Foote for life sixteen hundred pounds a year, as Reynolds told me, and to allow him to play so often on such terms that he may gain four hundred pounds more.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3144" id="noteref-3144" epub:type="noteref">3144</a> What Colman can get by this bargain, but trouble and hazard, I do not see. I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Dec.</abbr> 21, 1776.”</p>
			<p>The Reverend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hugh Blair, who had long been admired as a preacher at Edinburgh, thought now of diffusing his excellent sermons more extensively, and encreasing his reputation, by publishing a collection of them. He transmitted the manuscript to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan, the printer, who after keeping it for some time, wrote a letter to him, discouraging the publication.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3145" id="noteref-3145" epub:type="noteref">3145</a> Such at first was the unpropitious state of one of the most successful theological books that has ever appeared. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan, however, had sent one of the sermons to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson for his opinion; and after his unfavourable letter to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Blair had been sent off, he received from Johnson on Christmas-eve, a note in which was the following paragraph:</p>
			<p>“I have read over <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Blair’s first sermon with more than approbation; to say it is good, is to say too little.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3146" id="noteref-3146" epub:type="noteref">3146</a>”</p>
			<p>I believe <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan had very soon after this time a conversation with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson concerning them; and then he very candidly wrote again to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Blair, enclosing Johnson’s note, and <a id="III-page-98" />agreeing to purchase the volume, for which he and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cadell gave one hundred pounds. The sale was so rapid and extensive, and the approbation of the public so high, that to their honour be it recorded, the proprietors made <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Blair a present first of one sum, and afterwards of another, of fifty pounds, thus voluntarily doubling the stipulated price; and when he prepared another volume, they gave him at once three hundred pounds, being in all five hundred pounds, by an agreement to which I am a subscribing witness; and now for a third octavo volume he has received no less than six hundred pounds.</p>
			<p>1777: <abbr>Aetat.</abbr> 68.⁠—In 1777, it appears from his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prayers and Meditations</i>, that Johnson suffered much from a state of mind “unsettled and perplexed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3147" id="noteref-3147" epub:type="noteref">3147</a>” and from that constitutional gloom, which, together with his extreme humility and anxiety with regard to his religious state, made him contemplate himself through too dark and unfavourable a medium. It may be said of him, that he “saw GOD in clouds.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3148" id="noteref-3148" epub:type="noteref">3148</a>” Certain we may be of his injustice to himself in the following lamentable paragraph, which it is painful to think came from the contrite heart of this great man, to whose labours the world is so much indebted:</p>
			<p id="III-page-99">“When I survey my past life, I discover nothing but a barren waste of time, with some disorders of body, and disturbances of the mind, very near to madness,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3149" id="noteref-3149" epub:type="noteref">3149</a> which I hope He that made me will suffer to extenuate many faults, and excuse many deficiencies.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3150" id="noteref-3150" epub:type="noteref">3150</a>”</p>
			<p>But we find his devotions in this year eminently fervent; and we are comforted by observing intervals of quiet, composure, and gladness.</p>
			<p>On Easter-day we find the following emphatic prayer:</p>
			<p>“Almighty and most merciful Father, who seest all our miseries, and knowest all our necessities, look down upon me, and pity me. Defend me from the violent incursion [incursions] of evil thoughts, and enable me to form and keep such resolutions as may conduce to the discharge of the duties which thy providence shall appoint me; and so help me, by thy Holy Spirit, that my heart may surely there be fixed, where true joys are to be found, and that I may serve thee with pure affection and a cheerful mind. Have mercy upon me, O GOD, have mercy upon me; years and infirmities oppress me, terror and anxiety beset me. Have mercy upon me, my Creator and my Judge. [In all dangers protect me.] In all perplexities relieve and free me; and so help me by thy Holy Spirit, that I may now so commemorate the death of thy Son our Saviour JESUS CHRIST, as that when this short and painful life shall have an end, I may, for his sake, be received to everlasting happiness. Amen.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3151" id="noteref-3151" epub:type="noteref">3151</a>”</p>
			<p>While he was at church, the agreeable impressions upon his mind are thus commemorated:</p>
			<p>“I was for some time distressed, but at last obtained, I hope from the GOD of Peace, more quiet than I have enjoyed for a long time. I had made no resolution, but as my heart grew lighter, my hopes revived, and my courage increased; and I wrote with my pencil in my Common Prayer Book,</p>
			<p>‘Vita ordinanda.<br/>
			Biblia legenda.<br/>
			Theologiae opera danda.<br/>
			Serviendum et laetandum.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3152" id="noteref-3152" epub:type="noteref">3152</a>’ ”</p>
			<p id="III-page-100"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Steevens whose generosity is well known, joined <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson in kind assistance to a female relation of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Goldsmith, and desired that on her return to Ireland she would procure authentic particulars of the life of her celebrated relation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3153" id="noteref-3153" epub:type="noteref">3153</a> Concerning her there is the following letter:⁠—</p>
			<p>“To GEORGE STEEVENS, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“You will be glad to hear that from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Goldsmith, whom we lamented as drowned, I have received a letter full of gratitude to us all, with promise to make the enquiries which we recommended to her.</p>
			<p>“I would have had the honour of conveying this intelligence to Miss Caulfield, but that her letter is not at hand, and I know not the direction. You will tell the good news.</p>
			<p>“I am, Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“February 25, 1777.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-101">“MR. BOSWELL TO DR. JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 14, 1777.</p>
			<p>“My Dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“My state of epistolary accounts with you at present is extraordinary. The balance, as to number, is on your side. I am indebted to you for two letters; one dated the 16th of November, upon which very day I wrote to you, so that our letters were exactly exchanged, and one dated the 21st of December last.</p>
			<p>“My heart was warmed with gratitude by the truely kind contents of both of them; and it is amazing and vexing that I have allowed so much time to elapse without writing to you. But delay is inherent in me, by nature or by bad habit. I waited till I should have an opportunity of paying you my compliments on a new year. I have procrastinated till the year is no longer new.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Memis’s cause was determined against him, with £40 costs. The Lord President, and two other of the Judges, dissented from the majority, upon this ground;⁠—that although there may have been no intention to injure him by calling him <q>Doctor of Medicine</q>, instead of <q>Physician</q>, yet, as he remonstrated against the designation before the charter was printed off, and represented that it was disagreeable, and even hurtful to him, it was ill-natured to refuse to alter it, and let him have the designation to which he was certainly entitled. My own opinion is, that our court has judged wrong. The defendants were <i xml:lang="la">in malâ fide</i>, to persist in naming him in a way that he disliked. You remember poor Goldsmith, when he grew important, and wished to appear <q>Doctor Major</q> ,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3154" id="noteref-3154" epub:type="noteref">3154</a> could not bear your calling him <em>Goldy</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3155" id="noteref-3155" epub:type="noteref">3155</a> Would it not have been wrong to have named him so in your <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Preface to Shakespeare</i>, or in any serious permanent writing of any sort? The difficulty is, whether an action should be allowed on such petty wrongs. <i xml:lang="la">De minimis non curat lex</i>.</p>
			<p>“The Negro cause is not yet decided. A memorial is preparing on the side of slavery. I shall send you a copy as soon as it is printed. Maclaurin is made happy by your approbation of his memorial for the black.</p>
			<p>“Macquarry was here in the winter, and we passed an evening together.<br/>
			The sale of his estate cannot be prevented.</p>
			<p>“Sir Allan Maclean’s suit against the Duke of Argyle, for recovering the ancient inheritance of his family, is now fairly before all our judges. I spoke for him yesterday, and Maclaurin today; Crosbie spoke today <a id="III-page-102" />against him. Three more counsel are to be heard, and next week the cause will be determined. I send you the “Informations”, or “Cases”, on each side, which I hope you will read. You said to me when we were under Sir Allan’s hospitable roof, ‘I will help him with my pen.’ You said it with a generous glow; and though his Grace of Argyle did afterwards mount you upon an excellent horse, upon which ‘you looked like a Bishop,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3156" id="noteref-3156" epub:type="noteref">3156</a>’ you must not swerve from your purpose at Inchkenneth. I wish you may understand the points at issue, amidst our Scotch law principles and phrases.</p>
			<p>[Here followed a full state of the case, in which I endeavoured to make it as clear as I could to an Englishman, who had no knowledge of the formularies and technical language of the law of Scotland.]</p>
			<p>“I shall inform you how the cause is decided here. But as it may be brought under the review of our Judges, and is certainly to be carried by appeal to the House of Lords, the assistance of such a mind as yours will be of consequence. Your paper on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Vicious Intromission</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3157" id="noteref-3157" epub:type="noteref">3157</a> is a noble proof of what you can do even in Scotch law.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“I have not yet distributed all your books. Lord Hailes and Lord Monboddo have each received one, and return you thanks. Monboddo dined with me lately, and having drank tea, we were a good while by ourselves, and as I knew that he had read the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey</i> superficially, as he did not talk of it as I wished, I brought it to him, and read aloud several passages; and then he talked so, that I told him he was to have a copy <em>from the author</em>. He begged <em>that</em> might be marked on it.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“I ever am, my dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most faithful,</p>
			<p>“And affectionate humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<h3>“SIR ALEXANDER DICK TO DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.</h3>
			<p>“Prestonfield, <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 17, 1777.</p>
			<p>“Sir,</p>
			<p id="III-page-103">“I had yesterday the honour of receiving your book of your <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland</i>, which you was so good as to send me, by the hands of our mutual friend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3158" id="noteref-3158" epub:type="noteref">3158</a> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boswell, of Auchinleck; for which I return you my most hearty thanks; and after carefully reading it over again, shall deposit in my little collection of choice books, next our worthy friend’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey to Corsica</i>. As there are many things to admire in both performances, I have often wished that no Travels or Journeys should be published but those undertaken by persons of integrity and capacity to judge well, and describe faithfully, and in good language, the situation, condition, and manners of the countries past through. Indeed our country of Scotland, in spite of the union of the crowns, is still in most places so devoid of clothing, or cover from hedges and plantations, that it was well you gave your readers a sound <i xml:lang="fr">Monitoire</i> with respect to that circumstance. The truths you have told, and the purity of the language in which they are expressed, as your <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey</i> is universally read, may, and already appear to have a very good effect. For a man of my acquaintance, who has the largest nursery for trees and hedges in this country, tells me, that of late the demand upon him for these articles is doubled, and sometimes tripled. I have, therefore, listed <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Samuel Johnson in some of my memorandums of the principal planters and favourers of the enclosures, under a name which I took the liberty to invent from the Greek, <i xml:lang="grc-Latn">Papadendrion</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3159" id="noteref-3159" epub:type="noteref">3159</a> Lord Auchinleck and some few more are of the list. I am told that one gentleman in the shire of Aberdeen, <i>viz</i>. Sir Archibald Grant, has planted above fifty millions of trees on a piece of very wild ground at Monimusk: I must enquire if he has fenced them well, before he enters my list; for, that is the soul of enclosing. I began myself to plant a little, our ground being too valuable for much, and that is now fifty years ago; and the trees, now in my seventy-fourth year, I look up to with reverence, and show them to my eldest son now in his fifteenth year, and they are full the height of my country-house here, where I had the pleasure of receiving you, and hope again to have that satisfaction with our mutual friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boswell. I shall always continue, with the truest esteem, dear Doctor,</p>
			<p>“Your much obliged,</p>
			<p>“And obedient humble servant,</p>
			<p>“ALEXANDER DICK.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3160" id="noteref-3160" epub:type="noteref">3160</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-104">“To JAMES BOSWELL, <abbr class="eoc">Esq.</abbr></p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“It is so long since I heard anything from you,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3161" id="noteref-3161" epub:type="noteref">3161</a> that I am not easy about it; write something to me next post. When you sent your last letter, everything seemed to be mending; I hope nothing has lately grown worse. I suppose young Alexander continues to thrive, and Veronica is now very pretty company. I do not suppose the lady is yet reconciled to me, yet let her know that I love her very well, and value her very much.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Blair is printing some sermons. If they are all like the first, which I have read, they are <i xml:lang="la">sermones aurei, ac auro magis aurei</i>. It is excellently written both as to doctrine and language. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Watson’s book<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3162" id="noteref-3162" epub:type="noteref">3162</a> seems to be much esteemed.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“Poor Beauclerk still continues very ill.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3163" id="noteref-3163" epub:type="noteref">3163</a> Langton lives on as he used to do.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3164" id="noteref-3164" epub:type="noteref">3164</a> His children are very pretty, and, I think, his lady loses her Scotch. Paoli I never see.</p>
			<p>“I have been so distressed by difficulty of breathing, that I lost, as was computed, six-and-thirty ounces of blood in a few days.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3165" id="noteref-3165" epub:type="noteref">3165</a> I am better, but not well.</p>
			<p>“I wish you would be vigilant and get me Graham’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Telemachus</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3166" id="noteref-3166" epub:type="noteref">3166</a> that was printed at Glasgow, a very little book; and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Johnstoni Poemata</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3167" id="noteref-3167" epub:type="noteref">3167</a> another little book, printed at Middleburgh.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams sends her compliments, and promises that when you come hither, she will accommodate you as well as ever she can in the old room.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3168" id="noteref-3168" epub:type="noteref">3168</a> She wishes to know whether you sent her book<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3169" id="noteref-3169" epub:type="noteref">3169</a> to Sir Alexander Gordon.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3170" id="noteref-3170" epub:type="noteref">3170</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-105">“My dear Boswell, do not neglect to write to me; for your kindness is one of the pleasures of my life, which I should be sorry to lose.</p>
			<p>“I am, Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“February 18, 1777.”</p>
			<p>“To DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 24, 1777.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“Your letter dated the 18th instant, I had the pleasure to receive last post. Although my late long neglect, or rather delay, was truely culpable, I am tempted not to regret it, since it has produced me so valuable a proof of your regard. I did, indeed, during that inexcusable silence, sometimes divert the reproaches of my own mind, by fancying that I should hear again from you, inquiring with some anxiety about me, because, for aught you knew, I might have been ill.</p>
			<p>“You are pleased to show me, that my kindness is of some consequence to you. My heart is elated at the thought. Be assured, my dear Sir, that my affection and reverence for you are exalted and steady. I do not believe that a more perfect attachment ever existed in the history of mankind. And it is a noble attachment; for the attractions are Genius, Learning, and Piety.</p>
			<p>“Your difficulty of breathing alarms me, and brings into my imagination an event, which although in the natural course of things, I must expect at some period, I cannot view with composure.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“My wife is much honoured by what you say of her. She begs you may accept of her best compliments. She is to send you some marmalade of oranges of her own making.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“I ever am, my dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most obliged</p>
			<p>“And faithful humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I have been much pleased with your late letter, and am glad that my old enemy <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell, begins to feel some remorse. As to Miss Veronica’s Scotch, I think it cannot be helped. An English maid you might easily have; but she would still imitate the greater <a id="III-page-106" />number, as they would be likewise those whom she must most respect. Her dialect will not be gross. Her Mamma has not much Scotch, and you have yourself very little. I hope she knows my name, and does not call me <q>Johnston</q>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3171" id="noteref-3171" epub:type="noteref">3171</a></p>
			<p>“The immediate cause of my writing is this:⁠—One Shaw,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3172" id="noteref-3172" epub:type="noteref">3172</a> who seems a modest and a decent man, has written an <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Erse Grammar</i>, which a very learned Highlander, Macbean,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3173" id="noteref-3173" epub:type="noteref">3173</a> has, at my request, examined and approved.</p>
			<p>“The book is very little, but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shaw has been persuaded by his friends to set it at half a guinea, though I advised only a crown, and thought myself liberal. You, whom the author considers as a great encourager of ingenious men, will receive a parcel of his proposals and receipts. I have undertaken to give you notice of them, and to solicit your countenance. You must ask no poor man, because the price is really too high. Yet such a work deserves patronage.</p>
			<p>“It is proposed to augment our club from twenty to thirty, of which I am glad; for as we have several in it whom I do not much like to consort with,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3174" id="noteref-3174" epub:type="noteref">3174</a> I am for reducing it to a mere miscellaneous collection of conspicuous men, without any determinate character.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Most affectionately your’s,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“March 11, 1777.”</p>
			<p>“My respects to Madam, to Veronica, to Alexander, to Euphemia, to<br/>
			David.”</p>
			<p>“MR. BOSWELL TO DR. JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, April 4, 1777.</p>
			<p>[After informing him of the death of my little son David, and that I could not come to London this spring:⁠—]</p>
			<p id="III-page-107">“I think it hard that I should be a whole year without seeing you. May I presume to petition for a meeting with you in the autumn? You have, I believe, seen all the cathedrals in England, except that of Carlisle. If you are to be with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor, at Ashbourne, it would not be a great journey to come thither. We may pass a few most agreeable days there by ourselves, and I will accompany you a good part of the way to the southward again. Pray think of this.</p>
			<p>“You forget that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shaw’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Erse Grammar</i> was put into your hands by myself last year. Lord Eglintoune put it into mine. I am glad that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Macbean approves of it. I have received <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shaw’s Proposals for its publication, which I can perceive are written <em>by the hand of a MASTER</em>.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“Pray get for me all the editions of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Walton’s Lives</i>: I have a notion that the republication of them with Notes will fall upon me, between <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Home and Lord Hailes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3175" id="noteref-3175" epub:type="noteref">3175</a>”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shaw’s Proposals[dagger] for <i>An Analysis of the Scotch Celtic<br/>
			Language</i>, were thus illuminated by the pen of Johnson:</p>
			<p>“Though the Erse dialect of the Celtic language has, from the earliest times, been spoken in Britain, and still subsists in the northern parts and adjacent islands, yet, by the negligence of a people rather warlike than lettered, it has hitherto been left to the caprice and judgement of every speaker, and has floated in the living voice, without the steadiness of analogy, or direction of rules. An Erse Grammar is an addition to the stores of literature; and its author hopes for the indulgence always shown to those that attempt to do what was never done before. If his work shall be found defective, it is at least all his own: he is not like other grammarians, a compiler or transcriber; what he delivers, he has learned by attentive observation among his countrymen, who perhaps will be themselves surprised to see that speech reduced to principles, which they have used only by imitation.</p>
			<p>“The use of this book will, however, not be confined to the mountains and islands; it will afford a pleasing and important subject of speculation, to those whose studies lead them to trace the affinity of languages, and the migrations of the ancient races, of mankind.”</p>
			<p>“To DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Glasgow, April 24, 1777.<br/>
			“MY DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p id="III-page-108">“Our worthy friend Thrale’s death having appeared in the newspapers, and been afterwards contradicted, I have been placed in a state of very uneasy uncertainty, from which I hoped to be relieved by you: but my hopes have as yet been vain. How could you omit to write to me on such an occasion? I shall wait with anxiety.</p>
			<p>“I am going to Auchinleck to stay a fortnight with my father. It is better not to be there very long at one time. But frequent renewals of attention are agreeable to him.</p>
			<p>“Pray tell me about this edition of ‘<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The English Poets</i>, with a Preface, biographical and critical, to each Author, by Samuel Johnson, LL.D.’ which I see advertised. I am delighted with the prospect of it. Indeed I am happy to feel that I am capable of being so much delighted with literature.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3176" id="noteref-3176" epub:type="noteref">3176</a> But is not the charm of this publication chiefly owing to the <i xml:lang="la">magnum nomen</i> in the front of it?</p>
			<p>“What do you say of Lord Chesterfield’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs and last Letters</i>?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3177" id="noteref-3177" epub:type="noteref">3177</a></p>
			<p>“My wife has made marmalade of oranges for you. I left her and my daughters and Alexander all well yesterday. I have taught Veronica to speak of you thus;⁠—<abbr>Dr.</abbr> John_son_, not Jon_ston_.</p>
			<p>“I remain, my dear Sir,<br/>
			“Your most affectionate,<br/>
			“And obliged humble servant,<br/>
			“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.<br/>
			“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“The story of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale’s death, as he had neither been sick nor in any other danger, made so little impression upon me, that I never thought about obviating its effects on anybody else. It is supposed to have been produced by the English custom of making April fools, that is, of sending one another on some foolish errand on the first of April.</p>
			<p>“Tell <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell that I shall taste her marmalade cautiously at first. <i xml:lang="la">Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3178" id="noteref-3178" epub:type="noteref">3178</a> Beware, says the Italian proverb, of a reconciled enemy. But when I find it does me no harm, I shall <a id="III-page-109" />then receive it and be thankful for it, as a pledge of firm, and, I hope, of unalterable kindness. She is, after all, a dear, dear lady.</p>
			<p>“Please to return <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Blair thanks for his sermons. The Scotch write<br/>
			English wonderfully well.</p>
			<p>“Your frequent visits to Auchinleck, and your short stay there, are very laudable and very judicious. Your present concord with your father gives me great pleasure; it was all that you seemed to want.</p>
			<p>“My health is very bad, and my nights are very unquiet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3179" id="noteref-3179" epub:type="noteref">3179</a> What can I do to mend them? I have for this summer nothing better in prospect than a journey into Staffordshire and Derbyshire, perhaps with Oxford and Birmingham in my way.</p>
			<p>“Make my compliments to Miss Veronica; I must leave it to <em>her</em> philosophy to comfort you for the loss of little David. You must remember, that to keep three out of four is more than your share. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale has but four out of eleven.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3180" id="noteref-3180" epub:type="noteref">3180</a></p>
			<p>“I am engaged to write little Lives, and little Prefaces, to a little edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The English Poets</i>. I think I have persuaded the booksellers to insert something of Thomson; and if you could give me some information about him, for the life which we have is very scanty, I should be glad. I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most affectionate humble servant,<br/>
			“SAM. JOHNSON.”<br/>
			“May 3, 1777.”</p>
			<p>To those who delight in tracing the progress of works of literature, it will be an entertainment to compare the limited design with the ample execution of that admirable performance, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Lives of the English Poets</i>, which is the richest, most beautiful and indeed most perfect production of Johnson’s pen. His notion of it at this time appears in the preceding letter. He has a memorandum in this year, ’29 May,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3181" id="noteref-3181" epub:type="noteref">3181</a> Easter Eve, I treated with booksellers on a bargain, but the time was not long.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3182" id="noteref-3182" epub:type="noteref">3182</a>” The bargain was concerning that undertaking; but his tender conscience seems alarmed lest it should have intruded too much on his devout preparation for the solemnity of the <a id="III-page-110" />ensuing day. But, indeed, very little time was necessary for Johnson’s concluding a treaty with the booksellers; as he had, I believe, less attention to profit from his labours than any man to whom literature has been a profession.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3183" id="noteref-3183" epub:type="noteref">3183</a> I shall here insert from a letter to me from my late worthy friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward Dilly, though of a later date, an account of this plan so happily conceived; since it was the occasion of procuring for us an elegant collection of the best biography and criticism of which our language can boast.</p>
			<p>“TO JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.<br/>
			“Southill, <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 26, 1777.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“You will find by this letter, that I am still in the same calm retreat, from the noise and bustle of London, as when I wrote to you last. I am happy to find you had such an agreeable meeting with your old friend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson; I have no doubt your stock is much increased by the interview; few men, nay I may say, scarcely any man, has got that fund of knowledge and entertainment as <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson in conversation. When he opens freely, everyone is attentive to what he says, and cannot fail of improvement as well as pleasure.</p>
			<p>“The edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Poets</i>, now printing, will do honour to the English press; and a concise account of the life of each author, by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, will be a very valuable addition, and stamp the reputation of this edition superior to anything that is gone before. The first cause that gave rise to this undertaking, I believe, was owing to the little trifling edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Poets</i>, printing by the Martins, at Edinburgh, and to be sold by Bell, in London. Upon examining the volumes which were printed, the type was found so extremely small, that many persons could not read them; not only this inconvenience attended it, but the inaccuracy of the press was very conspicuous. These reasons, as well as the idea of an invasion of what we call our Literary Property,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3184" id="noteref-3184" epub:type="noteref">3184</a> induced the London Booksellers to print an elegant and accurate edition of all the English Poets of reputation, from Chaucer to the present time.</p>
			<p>“Accordingly a select number of the most respectable booksellers met on the occasion; and, on consulting together, agreed, that all the proprietors of copyright in the various Poets should be summoned together; and when their opinions were given, to proceed immediately on the business. Accordingly a meeting was held, consisting of about <a id="III-page-111" />forty of the most respectable booksellers of London, when it was agreed that an elegant and uniform edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The English Poets</i> should be immediately printed, with a concise account of the life of each author, by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Samuel Johnson; and that three persons should be deputed to wait upon <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, to solicit him to undertake the Lives, <i>viz</i>., T. Davies, Strahan, and Cadell. The Doctor very politely undertook it, and seemed exceedingly pleased with the proposal. As to the terms, it was left entirely to the Doctor to name his own: he mentioned two hundred guineas<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3185" id="noteref-3185" epub:type="noteref">3185</a>: it was immediately agreed to; and a farther compliment, I believe, will be made him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3186" id="noteref-3186" epub:type="noteref">3186</a> A committee was likewise appointed to engage the best engravers, <i>viz</i>., Bartolozzi, Sherwin, Hall, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Likewise another committee for giving directions about the paper, printing, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, so that the whole will be conducted with spirit, and in the best manner, with respect to authorship, editorship, engravings, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> My brother will give you a list of the Poets we mean to give, many of which are within the time of the Act of Queen Anne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3187" id="noteref-3187" epub:type="noteref">3187</a> which Martin and Bell cannot give, as they have no property in them; the proprietors are almost all the booksellers in London, of consequence. I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Ever your’s,<br/>
			“EDWARD DILLY.”</p>
			<p>I shall afterwards have occasion to consider the extensive and varied range which Johnson took, when he was once led upon ground which he trod with a peculiar delight, having long been intimately acquainted with all the circumstances of it that could interest and please.</p>
			<p>“DR. JOHNSON TO CHARLES O’CONNOR, <abbr>Esq.</abbr><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3188" id="noteref-3188" epub:type="noteref">3188</a></p>
			<h3>“SIR,</h3>
			<p id="III-page-112">“Having had the pleasure of conversing with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Campbell about your character and your literary undertaking, I am resolved to gratify myself by renewing a correspondence which began and ended a great while ago, and ended, I am afraid, by my fault; a fault which, if you have not forgotten it, you must now forgive.</p>
			<p>“If I have ever disappointed you, give me leave to tell you, that you have likewise disappointed me. I expected great discoveries in Irish antiquity, and large publications in the Irish language; but the world still remains at it was, doubtful and ignorant. What the Irish language is in itself, and to what languages it has affinity, are very interesting questions, which every man wishes to see resolved that has any philological or historical curiosity. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Leland begins his history too late: the ages which deserve an exact enquiry are those times (for<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3189" id="noteref-3189" epub:type="noteref">3189</a> such there were) when Ireland was the school of the west, the quiet habitation of sanctity and literature. If you could give a history, though imperfect, of the Irish nation, from its conversion to Christianity to the invasion from England, you would amplify knowledge with new views and new objects. Set about it therefore, if you can: do what you can easily do without anxious exactness. Lay the foundation, and leave the superstructure to posterity. I am, Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,<br/>
			“SAM. JOHNSON.”<br/>
			“May 19, 1777.”</p>
			<p>Early in this year came out, in two volumes quarto, the posthumous works of the learned <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Zachary Pearce, Bishop of Rochester; being <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Commentary, with Notes, on the four Evangelists and the Acts of the Apostles</i>, with other theological pieces. Johnson had now an opportunity of making a grateful return to that excellent prelate, who, we have seen,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3190" id="noteref-3190" epub:type="noteref">3190</a> was the only person who gave him any assistance in the compilation of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i>. The Bishop had left some account of his life and character, written by himself. To this Johnson made some valuable additions<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3191" id="noteref-3191" epub:type="noteref">3191</a>[dagger], <a id="III-page-113" />and also furnished to the editor, the Reverend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Derby, a Dedication[dagger], which I shall here insert, both because it will appear at this time with peculiar propriety; and because it will tend to propagate and increase that “fervour of <em>Loyalty</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3192" id="noteref-3192" epub:type="noteref">3192</a>” which in me, who boast of the name of TORY, is not only a principle, but a passion.</p>
			<p>“To THE KING.</p>
			<p>“SIR,</p>
			<p>“I presume to lay before your Majesty the last labours of a learned Bishop, who died in the toils and duties of his calling.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3193" id="noteref-3193" epub:type="noteref">3193</a> He is now beyond the reach of all earthly honours and rewards; and only the hope of inciting others to imitate him, makes it now fit to be remembered, that he enjoyed in his life the favour of your Majesty.</p>
			<p>“The tumultuary life of Princes seldom permits them to survey the wide extent of national interest, without losing sight of private merit; to exhibit qualities which may be imitated by the highest and the humblest of mankind; and to be at once amiable and great.</p>
			<p>“Such characters, if now and then they appear in history, are contemplated with admiration. May it be the ambition of all your subjects to make haste with their tribute of reverence: and as posterity may learn from your Majesty how Kings should live, may they learn, likewise, from your people, how they should be honoured. I am,</p>
			<p>“May it please your Majesty,<br/>
			With the most profound respect,<br/>
			Your Majesty’s<br/>
			Most dutiful and devoted<br/>
			Subject and Servant.”</p>
			<p>In the summer he wrote a Prologue[*] which was spoken before <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">A Word to the Wise</i>, a comedy by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hugh Kelly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3194" id="noteref-3194" epub:type="noteref">3194</a> which had <a id="III-page-114" />been brought upon the stage in 1770; but he being a writer for ministry, in one of the newspapers, it fell a sacrifice to popular fury, and in the playhouse phrase, was <em>damned</em>. By the generosity of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harris, the proprietor of Covent Garden theatre, it was now exhibited for one night, for the benefit of the author’s widow and children. To conciliate the favour of the audience was the intention of Johnson’s Prologue, which, as it is not long, I shall here insert, as a proof that his poetical talents were in no degree impaired.</p>
			<p>“This night presents a play, which public rage,<br/>
			Or right or wrong, once hooted from the stage:<br/>
			From zeal or malice, now no more we dread,<br/>
			For English vengeance <em>wars not with the dead</em>.<br/>
			A generous foe regards with pitying eye<br/>
			The man whom Fate has laid where all must lie.<br/>
			To wit, reviving from its author’s dust,<br/>
			Be kind, ye judges, or at least be just:<br/>
			Let no renewed hostilities invade<br/>
			Th” oblivious grave’s inviolable shade.<br/>
			Let one great payment every claim appease,<br/>
			And him who cannot hurt, allow to please;<br/>
			To please by scenes, unconscious of offence,<br/>
			By harmless merriment, or useful sense.<br/>
			Where aught of bright or fair the piece displays,<br/>
			Approve it only;⁠—“ ’tis too late to praise.<br/>
			If want of skill or want of care appear,<br/>
			Forbear to hiss;⁠—the poet cannot hear.<br/>
			By all, like him, must praise and blame be found,<br/>
			At last, a fleeting gleam, or empty sound;<br/>
			Yet then shall calm reflection bless the night,<br/>
			When liberal pity dignified delight;<br/>
			When pleasure fir’d her torch at virtue’s flame,<br/>
			And mirth was bounty with an humbler name.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3195" id="noteref-3195" epub:type="noteref">3195</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-115">A circumstance which could not fail to be very pleasing to Johnson occurred this year. The Tragedy of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Sir Thomas Overbury</i>, written by his early companion in London, Richard Savage<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3196" id="noteref-3196" epub:type="noteref">3196</a> was brought out with alterations at Drury-lane theatre.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3197" id="noteref-3197" epub:type="noteref">3197</a> The Prologue to it was written by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richard Brinsley Sheridan; in which, after describing very pathetically the wretchedness of</p>
			<p>“Ill-fated Savage, at whose birth was giv’n<br/>
			No parent but the Muse, no friend but Heav’n:”</p>
			<p>he introduced an elegant compliment to Johnson on his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i>, that wonderful performance which cannot be too often or too highly praised; of which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harris, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Philological Inquiries</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3198" id="noteref-3198" epub:type="noteref">3198</a> justly and liberally observes: “Such is its merit, that our language does not possess a more copious, learned, and valuable work.” The concluding, lines of this Prologue were these:⁠—</p>
			<p>“So pleads the tale that gives to future times<br/>
			The son’s misfortunes and the parent’s crimes;<br/>
			There shall his fame (if own’d tonight) survive,<br/>
			Fix’d by THE HAND THAT BIDS OUR LANGUAGE LIVE.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3199" id="noteref-3199" epub:type="noteref">3199</a>”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheridan here at once did honour to his taste and to his liberality of sentiment, by showing that he was not prejudiced from the unlucky difference which had taken place between his worthy father and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson. I have already mentioned, that Johnson was very desirous of reconciliation with old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheridan.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3200" id="noteref-3200" epub:type="noteref">3200</a> It will, therefore, not seem at all surprising that he was <a id="III-page-116" />zealous in acknowledging the brilliant merit of his son. While it had as yet been displayed only in the drama, Johnson proposed him as a member of THE LITERARY CLUB, observing, that “He who has written the two best comedies of his age, is surely a considerable man.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3201" id="noteref-3201" epub:type="noteref">3201</a>” And he had, accordingly, the honour to be elected; for an honour it undoubtedly must be allowed to be, when it is considered of whom that society consists, and that a single black ball excludes a candidate.</p>
			<h3>“MR. BOSWELL TO DR. JOHNSON.</h3>
			<p>“July 9, 1777.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3202" id="noteref-3202" epub:type="noteref">3202</a></p>
			<p>“MY DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“For the health of my wife and children I have taken the little country-house at which you visited my uncle, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Boswell,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3203" id="noteref-3203" epub:type="noteref">3203</a> who, having lost his wife, is gone to live with his son. We took possession of our villa about a week ago; we have a garden of three quarters of an acre, well stocked with fruit-trees and flowers, and gooseberries and currants, and peas and beans, and cabbages, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and my children are quite happy. I now write to you in a little study, from the window of which I see around me a verdant grove, and beyond it the lofty mountain called Arthur’s Seat.</p>
			<p>“Your last letter, in which you desire me to send you some additional information concerning Thomson, reached me very fortunately just as I was going to Lanark, to put my wife’s two nephews, the young Campbells, to school there, under the care of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomson, the master of it, whose wife is sister to the author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Seasons</i>. She is an old woman; but her memory is very good; and she will with pleasure give me for you every particular that you wish to know, and she can tell. Pray then take the trouble to send me such questions as may lead to biographical materials. You say that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i> which we have of Thomson is scanty. Since I received your letter I have read his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i>, <a id="III-page-117" />published under the name of Cibber, but as you told me, really written by a <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shiels;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3204" id="noteref-3204" epub:type="noteref">3204</a> that written by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Murdoch; one prefixed to an edition of the Seasons, published at Edinburgh, which is compounded of both, with the addition of an anecdote of Quin’s relieving Thomson from prison;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3205" id="noteref-3205" epub:type="noteref">3205</a> the abridgement of Murdoch’s account of him, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Biographia Britannica</i>, and another abridgement of it in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Biographical Dictionary</i>, enriched with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Joseph Warton’s critical panegyric on the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Seasons</i> in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essay on the Genius and Writings of Pope</i>: from all these it appears to me that we have a pretty full account of this poet. However, you will, I doubt not, show me many blanks, and I shall do what can be done to have them filled up. As Thomson never returned to Scotland, (which <em>you</em> will think very wise,) his sister can speak from her own knowledge only as to the early part of his life. She has some letters from him, which may probably give light as to his more advanced progress, if she will let us see them, which I suppose she will.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3206" id="noteref-3206" epub:type="noteref">3206</a> I believe George Lewis Scott<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3207" id="noteref-3207" epub:type="noteref">3207</a> and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Armstrong<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3208" id="noteref-3208" epub:type="noteref">3208</a> are now his only surviving companions, while he lived in and about London; and they, I dare say, can tell more of him than is yet known. My own notion is, that Thomson was a much coarser man than his friends are willing to acknowledge.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3209" id="noteref-3209" epub:type="noteref">3209</a> His <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Seasons</i> are indeed full of elegant and pious sentiments: but a rank soil, nay a dunghill, will produce beautiful flowers.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3210" id="noteref-3210" epub:type="noteref">3210</a></p>
			<p>“Your edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The English Poets</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3211" id="noteref-3211" epub:type="noteref">3211</a> will be very valuable, on account of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prefaces</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives</i>. But I have seen a specimen of an edition <a id="III-page-118" />of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Poets</i> at the Apollo press, at Edinburgh, which, for excellence in printing and engraving, highly deserves a liberal encouragement.</p>
			<p>“Most sincerely do I regret the bad health and bad rest with which you have been afflicted; and I hope you are better. I cannot believe that the Prologue which you generously gave to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kelly’s widow and children the other day, is the effusion of one in sickness and in disquietude: but external circumstances are never sure indications of the state of man. I send you a letter which I wrote to you two years ago at Wilton;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3212" id="noteref-3212" epub:type="noteref">3212</a> and did not send it at the time, for fear of being reproved as indulging too much tenderness; and one written to you at the tomb of Melancthon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3213" id="noteref-3213" epub:type="noteref">3213</a> which I kept back, lest I should appear at once too superstitious and too enthusiastic. I now imagine that perhaps they may please you.</p>
			<p>“You do not take the least notice of my proposal for our meeting at Carlisle.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3214" id="noteref-3214" epub:type="noteref">3214</a> Though I have meritoriously refrained from visiting London this year, I ask you if it would not be wrong that I should be two years without having the benefit of your conversation, when, if you come down as far as Derbyshire, we may meet at the expense of a few days’ journeying, and not many pounds. I wish you to see Carlisle, which made me mention that place. But if you have not a desire to complete your tour of the English cathedrals, I will take a larger share of the road between this place and Ashbourne. So tell me <em>where</em> you will fix for our passing a few days by ourselves. Now don’t cry ‘foolish fellow,’ or ‘idle dog.’ Chain your humour, and let your kindness play.</p>
			<p>“You will rejoice to hear that Miss Macleod, of Rasay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3215" id="noteref-3215" epub:type="noteref">3215</a> is married to Colonel Mure Campbell, an excellent man, with a pretty good estate of his own, and the prospect of having the Earl of Loudoun’s fortune and honours. Is not this a noble lot for our fair Hebridean? How happy am I that she is to be in Ayrshire. We shall have the Laird of Rasay, and old Malcolm, and I know not how many gallant Macleods, and bagpipes, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr>etc.</abbr> at Auchinleck. Perhaps you may meet them all there.</p>
			<p id="III-page-119">“Without doubt you have read what is called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Life</i> of David Hume,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3216" id="noteref-3216" epub:type="noteref">3216</a> written by himself, with the letter from <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Adam Smith subjoined to it. Is not this an age of daring effrontery? My friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Anderson, Professor of Natural Philosophy at Glasgow, at whose house you and I supped,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3217" id="noteref-3217" epub:type="noteref">3217</a> and to whose care <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Windham,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3218" id="noteref-3218" epub:type="noteref">3218</a> of Norfolk, was entrusted at that University, paid me a visit lately; and after we had talked with indignation and contempt of the poisonous productions with which this age is infested, he said there was now an excellent opportunity for <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson to step forth. I agreed with him that you might knock Hume’s and Smith’s heads together, and make vain and ostentatious infidelity exceedingly ridiculous. Would it not be worth your while to crush such noxious weeds in the moral garden?</p>
			<p>“You have said nothing to me of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3219" id="noteref-3219" epub:type="noteref">3219</a> I know not how you think on that subject; though the newspapers give us a saying of your’s in favour of mercy to him. But I own I am very desirous that the royal prerogative of remission of punishment should be employed to exhibit an illustrious instance of the regard which GOD’s VICEGERENT will ever show to piety and virtue. If for ten righteous men the ALMIGHTY would have spared Sodom, shall not a thousand acts of goodness done by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd counterbalance one crime? Such an instance would do more to encourage goodness, than his execution would do to deter from vice. I am not afraid of any bad consequence to society; for who will persevere for a long course of years in a distinguished discharge of religious duties, with a view to commit a forgery with impunity?</p>
			<p>“Pray make my best compliments acceptable to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale, by assuring them of my hearty joy that the <em>Master</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3220" id="noteref-3220" epub:type="noteref">3220</a> as you call him, is alive. I hope I shall often taste his Champagne⁠—<em>soberly</em>.</p>
			<p>“I have not heard from Langton for a long time. I suppose he is as usual,</p>
			<p>‘Studious the busy moments to deceive.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3221" id="noteref-3221" epub:type="noteref">3221</a>’</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“I remain, my dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most affectionate, and faithful humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-120">On the 23rd of June, I again wrote to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, enclosing a ship-master’s receipt for a jar of orange-marmalade, and a large packet of Lord Hailes’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annals of Scotland</i>.</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I have just received your packet from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale’s, but have not daylight enough to look much into it. I am glad that I have credit enough with Lord Hailes to be trusted with more copy.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3222" id="noteref-3222" epub:type="noteref">3222</a> I hope to take more care of it than of the last. I return <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell my affectionate thanks for her present, which I value as a token of reconciliation.</p>
			<p>“Poor Dodd was put to death yesterday, in opposition to the recommendation of the jury<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3223" id="noteref-3223" epub:type="noteref">3223</a>⁠—the petition of the city of London<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3224" id="noteref-3224" epub:type="noteref">3224</a>⁠—and a subsequent petition signed by three-and-twenty thousand hands. Surely the voice of the public, when it calls so loudly, and calls only for mercy, ought to be heard.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3225" id="noteref-3225" epub:type="noteref">3225</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-121">“The saying that was given me in the papers I never spoke; but I wrote many of his petitions, and some of his letters. He applied to me very often. He was, I am afraid, long flattered with hopes of life; but I had no part in the dreadful delusion; for, as soon as the King had signed his sentence,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3226" id="noteref-3226" epub:type="noteref">3226</a> I obtained from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chamier<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3227" id="noteref-3227" epub:type="noteref">3227</a> an account of the disposition of the court towards him, with a declaration that there <q>was no hope even of a respite</q>. This letter immediately was laid before Dodd; but he believed those whom he wished to be right, as it is thought, till within three days of his end. He died with pious composure and resolution. I have just seen the Ordinary that attended him. His address to his fellow-convicts offended the Methodists;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3228" id="noteref-3228" epub:type="noteref">3228</a> but he had a <a id="III-page-122" />Moravian with him much of his time.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3229" id="noteref-3229" epub:type="noteref">3229</a> His moral character is very bad: I hope all is not true that is charged upon him. Of his behaviour in prison an account will be published.</p>
			<p>“I give you joy of your country-house, and your pretty garden; and hope some time to see you in your felicity. I was much pleased with your two letters that had been kept so long in store;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3230" id="noteref-3230" epub:type="noteref">3230</a> and rejoice at Miss Rasay’s advancement, and wish Sir Allan success.</p>
			<p id="III-page-123">“I hope to meet you somewhere towards the north, but am loath to come quite to Carlisle. Can we not meet at Manchester? But we will settle it in some other letters.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Seward,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3231" id="noteref-3231" epub:type="noteref">3231</a> a great favourite at Streatham, has been, I think, enkindled by our travels with a curiosity to see the Highlands. I have given him letters to you and Beattie. He desires that a lodging may be taken for him at Edinburgh, against his arrival. He is just setting out.</p>
			<p>“Langton has been exercising the militia.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3232" id="noteref-3232" epub:type="noteref">3232</a> <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams is, I fear, declining. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lawrence says he can do no more. She is gone to summer in the country, with as many conveniences about her as she can expect; but I have no great hope. We must all die: may we all be prepared!</p>
			<p>“I suppose Miss Boswell reads her book, and young Alexander takes to his learning. Let me hear about them; for everything that belongs to you, belongs in a more remote degree, and not, I hope, very remote, to, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Yours affectionately,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“June, 28, 1777.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-124">TO THE SAME.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“This gentleman is a great favourite at Streatham, and therefore you will easily believe that he has very valuable qualities. Our narrative has kindled him with a desire of visiting the Highlands, after having already seen a great part of Europe. You must receive him as a friend, and when you have directed him to the curiosities of Edinburgh, give him instructions and recommendations for the rest of his journey. I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“June 24, 1777.”</p>
			<p>Johnson’s benevolence to the unfortunate was, I am confident, as steady and active as that of any of those who have been most eminently distinguished for that virtue. Innumerable proofs of it I have no doubt will be forever concealed from mortal eyes. We may, however, form some judgement of it, from the many and very various instances which have been discovered. One, which happened in the course of this summer, is remarkable from the name and connection of the person who was the object of it. The circumstance to which I allude is ascertained by two letters, one to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton, and another to the Reverend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Vyse, rector of Lambeth, son of the respectable clergyman at Lichfield, who was contemporary with Johnson, and in whose father’s family Johnson had the happiness of being kindly received in his early years.</p>
			<p>“DR. JOHNSON TO BENNET LANGTON, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I have lately been much disordered by a difficulty of breathing, but am now better. I hope your house is well.</p>
			<p>“You know we have been talking lately of <abbr>St.</abbr> Cross, at Winchester; I have an old acquaintance whose distress makes him very desirous of an hospital, and I am afraid I have not strength enough to get him into the Chartreux. He is a painter, who never rose higher than to get his immediate living, and from that, at eighty-three, he is disabled by a slight stroke of the palsy, such as does not make him at all helpless on common occasions, though his hand is not steady enough for his art.</p>
			<p>“My request is, that you will try to obtain a promise of the next vacancy, from the Bishop of Chester. It is not a great thing to ask, and I hope we shall obtain it. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Warton has promised to favour him with his notice, and I hope he may end his days in peace. I am, Sir,</p>
			<p id="III-page-125">“Your most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“June 29, 1777.”</p>
			<p>“To THE REVEREND DR. VYSE, AT LAMBETH.</p>
			<p>“SIR,</p>
			<p>“I doubt not but you will readily forgive me for taking the liberty of requesting your assistance in recommending an old friend to his Grace the Archbishop, as Governor of the Charter-house.</p>
			<p>“His name is De Groot; he was born at Gloucester; I have known him many years. He has all the common claims to charity, being old, poor, and infirm, in a great degree. He has likewise another claim, to which no scholar can refuse attention; he is by several descents the nephew of Hugo Grotius; of him, from whom perhaps every man of learning has learnt something. Let it not be said that in any lettered country a nephew of Grotius asked a charity and was refused.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3233" id="noteref-3233" epub:type="noteref">3233</a></p>
			<p>“I am, reverend Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“July 9, 1777.”</p>
			<p>“REVEREND DR. VYSE TO MR. BOSWELL.</p>
			<p>“Lambeth, June 9, 1787.</p>
			<p>“SIR,</p>
			<p>“I have searched in vain for the letter which I spoke of, and which I wished, at your desire, to communicate to you. It was from <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, to return me thanks for my application to Archbishop Cornwallis in favour of poor De Groot. He rejoices at the success it met with, and is lavish in the praise he bestows upon his favourite, Hugo Grotius. I am really sorry that I cannot find this letter, as it is worthy of the writer. That which I send you enclosed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3234" id="noteref-3234" epub:type="noteref">3234</a> is at your service. It is very short, and will not perhaps be thought of any consequence, unless you should judge proper to consider it as a proof of the very humane part which <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson took in behalf of a distressed and deserving person. I am, Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most obedient humble servant,</p>
			<p>“W. VYSE.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-126">“DR. JOHNSON TO MR. EDWARD DILLY.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3235" id="noteref-3235" epub:type="noteref">3235</a></p>
			<p>“SIR,</p>
			<p>“To the collection of <i>English Poets</i>, I have recommended the volume of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Watts to be added; his name has long been held by me in veneration,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3236" id="noteref-3236" epub:type="noteref">3236</a> and I would not willingly be reduced to tell of him only that he was born and died. Yet of his life I know very little, and therefore must pass him in a manner very unworthy of his character, unless some of his friends will favour me with the necessary information; many of them must be known to you; and by your influence, perhaps I may obtain some instruction. My plan does not exact much; but I wish to distinguish Watts, a man who never wrote but for a good purpose. Be pleased to do for me what you can.</p>
			<p>“I am, Sir, your humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“Bolt-Court, Fleet-street,<br/>
			July 7, 1777.”</p>
			<p>“To DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, July 15, 1777.</p>
			<p>“MY DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“The fate of poor <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd made a dismal impression upon my mind.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“I had sagacity enough to divine that you wrote his speech to the Recorder, before sentence was pronounced. I am glad you have written so much for him; and I hope to be favoured with an exact list of the several pieces when we meet.</p>
			<p>“I received <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Seward as the friend of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale, and as a gentleman recommended by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson to my attention. I have introduced him to Lord Kames, Lord Monboddo, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Nairne. He is gone to the Highlands with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gregory; when he returns I shall do more for him.</p>
			<p>“Sir Allan Maclean has<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3237" id="noteref-3237" epub:type="noteref">3237</a> carried that branch of his cause, of which we had good hopes: the President and one other Judge only were against him. I wish the House of Lords may do as well as the Court of Session has done. But Sir Allan has not the lands of <em>Brolos</em> quite cleared by this judgement, till a long account is made up of debts and interests on the one side, and rents on the other. I am, however, not much afraid of the balance.</p>
			<p>“Macquarry’s estates,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3238" id="noteref-3238" epub:type="noteref">3238</a> Staffa and all, were sold yesterday, and <a id="III-page-127" />bought by a Campbell. I fear he will have little or nothing left out of the purchase money.</p>
			<p>“I send you the case against the negro,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3239" id="noteref-3239" epub:type="noteref">3239</a> by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cullen, son to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cullen, in opposition to Maclaurin’s for liberty, of which you have approved. Pray read this, and tell me what you think as a <em>Politician</em>, as well as a <em>Poet</em>, upon the subject.</p>
			<p>“Be so kind as to let me know how your time is to be distributed next autumn. I will meet you at Manchester, or where you please; but I wish you would complete your tour of the cathedrals, and come to Carlisle, and I will accompany you a part of the way homewards.</p>
			<p>“I am ever,</p>
			<p>“Most faithfully yours,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“Your notion of the necessity of an yearly interview is very pleasing to both my vanity and tenderness. I shall, perhaps, come to Carlisle another year; but my money has not held out so well as it used to do. I shall go to Ashbourne, and I purpose to make <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor invite you. If you live awhile with me at his house, we shall have much time to ourselves, and our stay will be no expense to us or him. I shall leave London the 28th; and after some stay at Oxford and Lichfield, shall probably come to Ashbourne about the end of your Session, but of all this you shall have notice. Be satisfied we will meet somewhere.</p>
			<p>“What passed between me and poor <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd you shall know more fully when we meet.</p>
			<p>“Of lawsuits there is no end; poor Sir Allan must have another trial, for which, however, his antagonist cannot be much blamed, having two Judges on his side. I am more afraid of the debts than of the House of Lords. It is scarcely to be imagined to what debts will swell, that are daily increasing by small additions, and how carelessly in a state of desperation debts are contracted. Poor Macquarry was far from thinking that when he sold his islands he should receive nothing. For what were they sold? And what was their yearly value? The admission of money into the Highlands will soon put an end to the feudal modes of life, by making those men landlords who were not chiefs. I do not know that the people will suffer by the change; but there was in the patriarchal authority something venerable and pleasing. Every eye must look with pain on a <em>Campbell</em> turning the <em>Macquarries</em> at will out of their <i xml:lang="la">sedes avitae</i>, their hereditary island.</p>
			<p id="III-page-128">“Sir Alexander Dick is the only Scotsman liberal enough not to be angry that I could not find trees, where trees were not. I was much delighted by his kind letter.</p>
			<p>“I remember Rasay with too much pleasure not to partake of the happiness of any part of that amiable family. Our ramble in the islands hangs upon my imagination, I can hardly help imagining that we shall go again. Pennant seems to have seen a great deal which we did not see: when we travel again let us look better about us.</p>
			<p>“You have done right in taking your uncle’s house. Some change in the form of life, gives from time to time a new epocha<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3240" id="noteref-3240" epub:type="noteref">3240</a> of existence. In a new place there is something new to be done, and a different system of thoughts rises in the mind. I wish I could gather currants in your garden. Now fit up a little study, and have your books ready at hand; do not spare a little money, to make your habitation pleasing to yourself.</p>
			<p>“I have dined lately with poor dear ⸺.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3241" id="noteref-3241" epub:type="noteref">3241</a> I do not think he goes on well. His table is rather coarse, and he has his children too much about him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3242" id="noteref-3242" epub:type="noteref">3242</a> But he is a very good man.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams is in the country to try if she can improve her health; she is very ill. Matters have come so about that she is in the country with very good accommodation; but age and sickness, and pride, have made her so peevish that I was forced to bribe the maid to stay with her, by a secret stipulation of half a crown a week over her wages.</p>
			<p>“Our CLUB ended its session about six weeks ago.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3243" id="noteref-3243" epub:type="noteref">3243</a> We now only meet to dine once a fortnight. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dunning,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3244" id="noteref-3244" epub:type="noteref">3244</a> the great lawyer, is one of our members. The Thrales are well.</p>
			<p id="III-page-129">“I long to know how the Negro’s cause will be decided. What is the opinion of Lord Auchinleck, or Lord Hailes, or Lord Monboddo?</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most affectionate, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“July 22, 1777.”</p>
			<p>“DR. JOHNSON TO MRS. BOSWELL.</p>
			<p>“MADAM,</p>
			<p>“Though I am well enough pleased with the taste of sweetmeats, very little of the pleasure which I received at the arrival of your jar of marmalade arose from eating it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3245" id="noteref-3245" epub:type="noteref">3245</a> I received it as a token of friendship, as a proof of reconciliation, things much sweeter than sweetmeats, and upon this consideration I return you, dear Madam, my sincerest thanks. By having your kindness I think I have a double security for the continuance of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boswell’s, which it is not to be expected that any man can long keep, when the influence of a lady so highly and so justly valued operates against him. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boswell will tell you that I was always faithful to your interest, and always endeavoured to exalt you in his estimation. You must now do the same for me. We must all help one another, and you must now consider me, as, dear Madam,</p>
			<p>“Your most obliged,</p>
			<p>“And most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“July 22, 1777.”</p>
			<p>“MR. BOSWELL TO DR. JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, July 28, 1777.</p>
			<p>“My Dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“This is the day on which you were to leave London and I have been amusing myself in the intervals of my law-drudgery, with figuring you in the Oxford post-coach. I doubt, however, if you have had so merry a journey as you and I had in that vehicle last year, when you made so much sport with Gwyn,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3246" id="noteref-3246" epub:type="noteref">3246</a> the architect. Incidents upon a <a id="III-page-130" />journey are recollected with peculiar pleasure; they are preserved in brisk spirits, and come up again in our minds, tinctured with that gaiety, or at least that animation with which we first perceived them.”</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>[I added, that something had occurred, which I was afraid might prevent me from meeting him;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3247" id="noteref-3247" epub:type="noteref">3247</a> and that my wife had been affected with complaints which threatened a consumption, but was now better.]</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“Do not disturb yourself about our interviews; I hope we shall have many; nor think it anything hard or unusual, that your design of meeting me is interrupted. We have both endured greater evils, and have greater evils to expect.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell’s illness makes a more serious distress. Does the blood rise from her lungs or from her stomach? From little vessels broken in the stomach there is no danger. Blood from the lungs is, I believe, always frothy, as mixed with wind. Your physicians know very well what is to be done. The loss of such a lady would, indeed, be very afflictive, and I hope she is in no danger. Take care to keep her mind as easy as is possible.</p>
			<p>“I have left Langton in London. He has been down with the militia, and is again quiet at home, talking to his little people, as, I suppose, you do sometimes. Make my compliments to Miss Veronica.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3248" id="noteref-3248" epub:type="noteref">3248</a> The rest are too young for ceremony.</p>
			<p>“I cannot but hope that you have taken your country-house at a very seasonable time, and that it may conduce to restore, or establish <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell’s health, as well as provide room and exercise for the young ones. That you and your lady may both be happy, and long enjoy your happiness, is the sincere and earnest wish of, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“Oxford, <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 4, 1777.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-131">“MR. BOSWELL TO DR. JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>[Informing him that my wife had continued to grow better, so that my alarming apprehensions were relieved: and that I hoped to disengage myself from the other embarrassment which had occurred, and therefore requesting to know particularly when he intended to be at Ashbourne.]</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I am this day come to Ashbourne, and have only to tell you, that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor says you shall be welcome to him, and you know how welcome you will be to me. Make haste to let me know when you may be expected.</p>
			<p>“Make my compliments to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell, and tell her, I hope we shall be at variance no more. I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“August 30, 1777.”</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“On Saturday I wrote a very short letter, immediately upon my arrival hither, to show you that I am not less desirous of the interview than yourself. Life admits not of delays; when pleasure can be had, it is fit to catch it. Every hour takes away part of the things that please us, and perhaps part of our disposition to be pleased. When I came to Lichfield, I found my old friend Harry Jackson dead.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3249" id="noteref-3249" epub:type="noteref">3249</a> It was a loss, and a loss not to be repaired, as he was one of the companions of my childhood. I hope we may long continue to gain friends, but the friends which merit or usefulness can procure us, are not able to supply the place of old acquaintance, with whom the days of youth may be retraced, and those images revived which gave the earliest delight. If you and I live to be much older, we shall take great delight in talking over the Hebridean Journey.</p>
			<p>“In the meantime it may not be amiss to contrive some other little adventure, but what it can be I know not; leave it, as Sidney says,</p>
			<p>‘To virtue, fortune, wine, and woman’s breast;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3250" id="noteref-3250" epub:type="noteref">3250</a>’</p>
			<p>for I believe <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell must have some part in the consultation.</p>
			<p id="III-page-132">“One thing you will like. The Doctor, so far as I can judge, is likely to leave us enough to ourselves. He was out today before <em>I</em> came down, and, I fancy, will stay out till dinner. I have brought the papers about poor Dodd, to show you, but you will soon have dispatched them.</p>
			<p>“Before I came away I sent poor <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams into the country, very ill of a pituitous defluxion, which wastes her gradually away, and which her physician declares himself unable to stop. I supplied her as far as could be desired, with all conveniences to make her excursion and abode pleasant and useful. But I am afraid she can only linger a short time in a morbid state of weakness and pain.</p>
			<p>“The Thrales, little and great, are all well, and purpose to go to Brighthelmstone at Michaelmas. They will invite me to go with them, and perhaps I may go, but I hardly think I shall like to stay the whole time; but of futurity we know but little.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Porter is well; but <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Aston, one of the ladies at Stowhill, has been struck with a palsy, from which she is not likely ever to recover. How soon may such a stroke fall upon us!</p>
			<p>“Write to me, and let us know when we may expect you.</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“Ashbourne, <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 1, 1777.”</p>
			<p>“MR. BOSWELL TO DR. JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 9, 1777.</p>
			<p>[After informing him that I was to set out next day, in order to meet him at Ashbourne.]</p>
			<p id="III-page-133">“I have a present for you from Lord Hailes; the fifth book of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lactantius</i>, which he has published with Latin notes. He is also to give you a few anecdotes for your <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Thomson</i>, who I find was private tutor to the present Earl of Hadington, Lord Hailes’s cousin, a circumstance not mentioned by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Murdoch. I have keen expectations of delight from your edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The English Poets</i>.</p>
			<p>“I am sorry for poor <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams’s situation. You will, however, have the comfort of reflecting on your kindness to her. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jackson’s death, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Aston’s palsy, are gloomy circumstances. Yet surely we should be habituated to the uncertainty of life and health. When my mind is unclouded by melancholy, I consider the temporary distresses of this state of being, as ‘light afflictions,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3251" id="noteref-3251" epub:type="noteref">3251</a>’ by stretching my mental view into that glorious after-existence, when they will appear to be as nothing. But present pleasures and present pains must be felt. I lately read <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rasselas</i> over again with great satisfaction.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3252" id="noteref-3252" epub:type="noteref">3252</a></p>
			<p>“Since you are desirous to hear about Macquarry’s sale I shall inform you particularly. The gentleman who purchased Ulva is <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Campbell, of Auchnaba: our friend Macquarry was proprietor of two-thirds of it, of which the rent was £156 5<abbr>s.</abbr> 1⁠–⁠1/2<abbr>d.</abbr> This parcel was set up at £4,069 5<abbr>s.</abbr> 1<abbr>d.</abbr>, but it sold for no less than £5,540. The other third of Ulva, with the island of Staffa, belonged to Macquarry of Ormaig. Its rent, including that of Staffa, £83 12<abbr>s.</abbr> 2⁠–⁠1/2<abbr>d.</abbr> set up at £2178 16<abbr>s.</abbr> 4<abbr>d.</abbr>⁠—sold for no less than £3,540. The Laird of Col wished to purchase Ulva, but he thought the price too high. There may, indeed, be great improvements made there, both in fishing and agriculture; but the interest of the purchase-money exceeds the rent so very much, that I doubt if the bargain will be profitable. There is an island called Little Colonsay, of £10 yearly rent, which I am informed has belonged to the Macquarrys of Ulva for many ages, but which was lately claimed by the Presbyterian Synod of Argyll, in consequence of a grant made to them by Queen Anne. It is believed that their claim will be dismissed, and that Little Colonsay will also be sold for the advantage of Macquarry’s creditors. What think you of purchasing this island, and endowing a school or college there, the master to be a clergyman of the Church of England? How venerable would such an institution make the name of DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON in the Hebrides! I have, like yourself, a wonderful pleasure in recollecting our travels in those islands. The pleasure is, I think, greater than it reasonably should be, considering that we had not much either of beauty or elegance to charm our imaginations, or of rude novelty to <a id="III-page-134" />astonish. Let us, by all means, have another expedition. I shrink a little from our scheme of going up the Baltic.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3253" id="noteref-3253" epub:type="noteref">3253</a> I am sorry you have already been in Wales; for I wish to see it. Shall we go to <a id="III-page-135" />Ireland, of which I have seen but little? We shall try to strike out a plan when we are at Ashbourne. I am ever,</p>
			<p>“Your most faithful humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I write to be left at Carlisle, as you direct me; but you cannot have it. Your letter, dated <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 6, was not at this place till this day, Thursday, <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 11; and I hope you will be here before this is at Carlisle.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3254" id="noteref-3254" epub:type="noteref">3254</a> However, what you have not going, you may have returning; and as I believe I shall not love you less after our interview, it will then be as true as it is now, that I set a very high value upon your friendship, and count your kindness as one of the chief felicities of my life. Do not fancy that an intermission of writing is a decay of kindness. No man is always in a disposition to write; nor has any man at all times something to say.</p>
			<p>“That distrust which intrudes so often on your mind is a mode of melancholy, which, if it be the business of a wise man to be happy, it is foolish to indulge; and if it be a duty to preserve our faculties entire for their proper use, it is criminal. Suspicion is very often an useless pain. From that, and all other pains, I wish you free and safe; for I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Most affectionately yours,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“Ashbourne, <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 11, 1777.”</p>
			<p>On Sunday evening <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 14, I arrived at Ashbourne, and drove directly up to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor’s door. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson and he appeared before I had got out of the post-chaise, and welcomed me cordially.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3255" id="noteref-3255" epub:type="noteref">3255</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-136">I told them that I had travelled all the preceding night, and gone to bed at Leek in Staffordshire; and that when I rose to go to church in the afternoon, I was informed there had been an earthquake,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3256" id="noteref-3256" epub:type="noteref">3256</a> of which, it seems, the shock had been felt in some degree at Ashbourne. JOHNSON. “Sir, it will be much exaggerated in popular talk: for, in the first place, the common people do not accurately adapt their thoughts to the objects; nor, secondly, do they accurately adapt their words to their thoughts: they do not mean to lie; but, taking no pains to be exact, they give you very false accounts. A great part of their language is proverbial. If anything rocks at all, they say <q>it rocks like a cradle</q>; and in this way they go on.”</p>
			<p>The subject of grief for the loss of relations and friends being introduced, I observed that it was strange to consider how soon it in general wears away. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor mentioned a gentleman of the neighbourhood as the only instance he had ever known of a person who had endeavoured to <em>retain</em> grief. He told <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor, that after his Lady’s death, which affected him deeply, he <em>resolved</em> that the grief, which he cherished with a kind of sacred fondness, should be lasting; but that he found he could not keep it long. JOHNSON. “All grief for what cannot in the course of nature be helped, soon wears away; in some sooner, indeed, in some later; but it never continues very long, unless where there is madness, such as will make a man have pride so fixed in his mind, as to imagine himself a King; or any other passion in an unreasonable way: for all unnecessary grief is unwise, and therefore will not be long retained by a sound mind.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3257" id="noteref-3257" epub:type="noteref">3257</a> If, indeed, the <a id="III-page-137" />cause of our grief is occasioned by our own misconduct, if grief is mingled with remorse of conscience, it should be lasting.” BOSWELL. “But, Sir, we do not approve of a man who very soon forgets the loss of a wife or a friend.” JOHNSON. “Sir, we disapprove of him, not because he soon forgets his grief, for the sooner it is forgotten the better, but because we suppose, that if he forgets his wife or his friend soon, he has not had much affection for them.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3258" id="noteref-3258" epub:type="noteref">3258</a>”</p>
			<p>I was somewhat disappointed in finding that the edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The English Poets</i>, for which he was to write Prefaces and Lives, was not an undertaking directed by him: but that he was to furnish a Preface and Life to any poet the booksellers pleased. I asked him if he would do this to any dunce’s works, if they should ask him. JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir; and <em>say</em> he was a dunce.” My friend seemed now not much to relish talking of this edition.</p>
			<p>On Monday, September 15, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson observed, that everybody commended such parts of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey to the Western Islands</i>, as were in their own way. “For instance, (said he,) <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jackson (the all-knowing)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3259" id="noteref-3259" epub:type="noteref">3259</a> told me there was more good sense upon trade in it, than he should hear in the House of Commons in a year, except from Burke. Jones commended the part which treats of language; Burke that which describes the inhabitants of mountainous countries.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3260" id="noteref-3260" epub:type="noteref">3260</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-138">After breakfast, Johnson carried me to see the garden belonging to the school of Ashbourne, which is very prettily formed upon a bank, rising gradually behind the house. The Reverend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langley,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3261" id="noteref-3261" epub:type="noteref">3261</a> the headmaster, accompanied us.</p>
			<p>While we sat basking in the sun upon a seat here, I introduced a common subject of complaint, the very small salaries which many curates have, and I maintained, “that no man should be invested with the character of a clergyman, unless he has a security for such an income as will enable him to appear respectable; that, therefore, a clergyman should not be allowed to have a curate, unless he gives him a hundred pounds a year; if he cannot do that, let him perform the duty himself.” JOHNSON. “To be sure, Sir, it is wrong that any clergyman should be without a reasonable income; but as the church revenues were sadly diminished at the Reformation, the clergy who have livings cannot afford, in many instances, to give good salaries to curates, without leaving themselves too little; and, if no curate were to be permitted unless he had a hundred pounds a year, their number would be very small, which would be a disadvantage, as then there would not be such choice in the nursery for the church, curates being candidates for the higher ecclesiastical offices, according to their merit and good behaviour.” He explained the system of the English Hierarchy exceedingly well. “It is not thought fit (said he) to trust a man with the care of a parish till he has given proof as a curate that he shall deserve such a trust.” This is an excellent <em>theory</em>; and if the <em>practice</em> were according to it, the Church of England would be admirable indeed. However, as I have heard <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson observe as to the Universities, bad practice does not infer that the <em>constitution</em> is bad.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3262" id="noteref-3262" epub:type="noteref">3262</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-139">We had with us at dinner several of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor’s neighbours, good civil gentlemen, who seemed to understand <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson very well, and not to consider him in the light that a certain person did,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3263" id="noteref-3263" epub:type="noteref">3263</a> who being struck, or rather stunned by his voice and manner, when he was afterwards asked what he thought of him, answered, “He’s a tremendous companion.”</p>
			<p>Johnson told me, that “Taylor was a very sensible acute man, and had a strong mind;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3264" id="noteref-3264" epub:type="noteref">3264</a> that he had great activity in some respects, and yet such a sort of indolence, that if you should put a pebble upon his chimneypiece, you would find it there, in the same state, a year afterwards.”</p>
			<p>And here is the proper place to give an account of Johnson’s humane and zealous interference in behalf of the Reverend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> William Dodd, formerly Prebendary of Brecon, and chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3265" id="noteref-3265" epub:type="noteref">3265</a> celebrated as a very popular preacher,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3266" id="noteref-3266" epub:type="noteref">3266</a> <a id="III-page-140" />an encourager of charitable institutions, and author of a variety of works, chiefly theological. Having unhappily contracted expensive habits of living, partly occasioned by licentiousness of manners, he in an evil hour, when pressed by want of money, and dreading an exposure of his circumstances, forged a bond of which he attempted to avail himself to support his credit, flattering himself with hopes that he might be able to repay its amount without being detected. The person, whose name he thus rashly and criminally presumed to falsify, was the Earl of Chesterfield,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3267" id="noteref-3267" epub:type="noteref">3267</a> to whom he had been tutor, and who, he perhaps, in the warmth of his feelings, flattered himself would have generously paid the money in case of an alarm being taken, rather than suffer him to fall a victim to the dreadful consequences of violating the law against forgery, the most dangerous crime in a commercial country; but the unfortunate divine had the mortification to find that he was mistaken. His noble pupil appeared against him, and he was capitally convicted.</p>
			<p>Johnson told me that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd was very little acquainted with him, having been but once in his company, many years previous to this period<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3268" id="noteref-3268" epub:type="noteref">3268</a> (which was precisely the state of my <a id="III-page-141" />own acquaintance with Dodd); but in his distress he bethought himself of Johnson’s persuasive power of writing, if haply it might avail to obtain for him the Royal Mercy. He did not apply to him, directly, but, extraordinary as it may seem, through the late Countess of Harrington, who wrote a letter to Johnson, asking him to employ his pen in favour of Dodd. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allen, the printer, who was Johnson’s landlord and next neighbour in Bolt-court, and for whom he had much kindness,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3269" id="noteref-3269" epub:type="noteref">3269</a> was one of Dodd’s friends, of whom to the credit of humanity be it recorded, that he had many who did not desert him, even after his infringement of the law had reduced him to the state of a man under sentence of death. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allen told me that he carried Lady Harrington’s letter to Johnson, that Johnson read it walking up and down his chamber, and seemed much agitated, after which he said, “I will do what I can;”⁠—and certainly he did make extraordinary exertions.</p>
			<p>He this evening, as he had obligingly promised in one of his letters, put into my hands the whole series of his writings upon this melancholy occasion, and I shall present my readers with the abstract which I made from the collection; in doing which I studied to avoid copying what had appeared in print, and now make part of the edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Johnson’s Works</i>, published by the Booksellers of London, but taking care to mark Johnson’s variations in some of the pieces there exhibited.</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson wrote in the first place, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Speech to the Recorder of London</i>, at the Old-Bailey, when sentence of death was about to be pronounced upon him.</p>
			<p id="III-page-142">He wrote also “The Convict’s Address to his unhappy Brethren”, a sermon delivered by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd, in the chapel of Newgate.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3270" id="noteref-3270" epub:type="noteref">3270</a></p>
			<p>According to Johnson’s manuscript it began thus after the text, <i>What shall I do to be saved?</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3271" id="noteref-3271" epub:type="noteref">3271</a>⁠—</p>
			<p>“These were the words with which the keeper, to whose custody Paul and Silas were committed by their prosecutors, addressed his prisoners, when he saw them freed from their bonds by the perceptible agency of divine favour, and was, therefore, irresistibly convinced that they were not offenders against the laws, but martyrs to the truth.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson was so good as to mark for me with his own hand, on a copy of this sermon which is now in my possession, such passages as were added by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd. They are not many: whoever will take the trouble to look at the printed copy, and attend to what I mention, will be satisfied of this.</p>
			<p>There is a short introduction by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd, and he also inserted this sentence, “You see with what confusion and dishonour I now stand before you;⁠—no more in the pulpit of instruction, but on this humble seat with yourselves.” The <em>notes</em> are entirely Dodd’s own, and Johnson’s writing ends at the words, “the thief whom he pardoned on the cross.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3272" id="noteref-3272" epub:type="noteref">3272</a>” What follows was supplied by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd himself.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3273" id="noteref-3273" epub:type="noteref">3273</a></p>
			<p>The other pieces mentioned by Johnson in the above-mentioned collection, are two letters, one to the Lord Chancellor Bathurst, (not Lord North, as is erroneously supposed,) and one to Lord Mansfield;⁠—A Petition from <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd to the King;⁠—A Petition from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Dodd to the Queen;⁠—Observations of some length inserted in the newspapers, on occasion of Earl <a id="III-page-143" />Percy’s having presented to his Majesty a petition for mercy to Dodd, signed by twenty thousand people, but all in vain. He told me that he had also written a petition from the city of London; “but (said he, with a significant smile) they <em>mended</em> it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3274" id="noteref-3274" epub:type="noteref">3274</a>” The last of these articles which Johnson wrote is <i epub:type="se:name.publication.essay"><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd’s last solemn Declaration</i>, which he left with the sheriff at the place of execution. Here also my friend marked the variations on a copy of that piece now in my possession. Dodd inserted, “I never knew or attended to the calls of frugality, or the needful minuteness of painful economy;” and in the next sentence he introduced the words which I distinguish by <em>Italics</em>; “My life for some <em>few unhappy</em> years past has been <em>dreadfully erroneous</em>.” Johnson’s expression was <em>hypocritical</em>; but his remark on the margin is “With this he said he could not charge himself.”</p>
			<p>Having thus authentically settled what part of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Occasional Papers</i>, concerning <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd’s miserable situation, came from the pen of Johnson, I shall proceed to present my readers with my record of the unpublished writings relating to that extraordinary and interesting matter.</p>
			<p id="III-page-144">I found a letter to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson from <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd, May 23, 1777, in which “The Convict’s Address” seems clearly to be meant:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I am so penetrated, my ever dear Sir, with a sense of your extreme benevolence towards me, that I cannot find words equal to the sentiments of my heart.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“You are too conversant in the world to need the slightest hint from me, of what infinite utility the Speech<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3275" id="noteref-3275" epub:type="noteref">3275</a> on the aweful day has been to me. I experience, every hour, some good effect from it. I am sure that effects still more salutary and important must follow from <em>your kind and intended favour</em>. I will labour⁠—GOD being my helper⁠—to do justice to it from the pulpit. I am sure, had I your sentiments constantly to deliver from thence, in all their mighty force and power, not a soul could be left unconvinced and unpersuaded.”</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>He added:⁠—</p>
			<p>“May GOD ALMIGHTY bless and reward, with his choicest comforts, your philanthropic actions, and enable me at all times to express what I feel of the high and uncommon obligations which I owe to the <em>first man</em> in our times.”</p>
			<p>On Sunday, June 22, he writes, begging <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s assistance in framing a supplicatory letter to his Majesty:⁠—</p>
			<p>“If his Majesty could be moved of his royal clemency to spare me and my family the hrrors and ignominy of a <em>public death</em>, which the public itself is solicitous to wave, and to grant me in some silent distant corner of the globe, to pass the remainder of my days in penitence and prayer, I would bless his clemency and be humbled.”</p>
			<p>This letter was brought to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson when in church. He stooped down and read it, and wrote, when he went home, the following letter for <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd to the King:⁠—</p>
			<p>“SIR,</p>
			<p>“May it not offend your Majesty, that the most miserable of men applies himself to your clemency, as his last hope and his last refuge; that your mercy is most earnestly and humbly implored by a clergyman, whom your Laws and Judges have condemned to the hrror and ignominy of a public execution.</p>
			<p id="III-page-145">“I confess the crime, and own the enormity of its consequences, and the danger of its example. Nor have I the confidence to petition for impunity; but humbly hope, that public security may be established, without the spectacle of a clergyman dragged through the streets, to a death of infamy, amidst the derision of the profligate and profane; and that justice may be satisfied with irrevocable exile, perpetual disgrace, and hopeless penury.</p>
			<p>“My life, Sir, has not been useless to mankind. I have benefited many. But my offences against GOD are numberless, and I have had little time for repentance. Preserve me, Sir, by your prerogative of mercy, from the necessity of appearing unprepared at that tribunal, before which Kings and Subjects must stand at last together. Permit me to hide my guilt in some obscure corner of a foreign country, where, if I can ever attain confidence to hope that my prayers will be heard, they shall be poured with all the fervour of gratitude for the life and happiness of your Majesty. I am, Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your Majesty’s, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr>’</p>
			<p>Subjoined to it was written as follows:</p>
			<p>“To DR. DODD.</p>
			<p>“SIR,</p>
			<p>“I most seriously enjoin you not to let it be at all known that I have written this letter, and to return the copy to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allen in a cover to me. I hope I need not tell you, that I wish it success.⁠—But do not indulge hope.⁠—Tell nobody.”</p>
			<p>It happened luckily that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allen was pitched on to assist in this melancholy office, for he was a great friend of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Akerman, the keeper of Newgate. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson never went to see <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd. He said to me, “it would have done <em>him</em> more harm, than good to Dodd, who once expressed a desire to see him, but not earnestly.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, on the 20th of June, wrote the following letter:</p>
			<p>“To THE RIGHT HONOURABLE CHARLES JENKINSON.</p>
			<p>“SIR,</p>
			<p>“Since the conviction and condemnation of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd, I have had, by the intervention of a friend, some intercourse with him, and I am sure I shall lose nothing in your opinion by tenderness and commiseration. Whatever be the crime, it is not easy to have any knowledge of the delinquent, without a wish that his life may be spared; at least when no life has been taken away by him. I will, therefore, take the liberty of suggesting some reasons for which I wish this unhappy being to escape the utmost rigour of his sentence.</p>
			<p id="III-page-146">“He is, so far as I can recollect, the first clergyman of our church who has suffered public execution for immorality; and I know not whether it would not be more for the interest of religion to bury such an offender in the obscurity of perpetual exile, than to expose him in a cart, and on the gallows, to all who for any reason are enemies to the clergy.</p>
			<p>“The supreme power has, in all ages, paid some attention to the voice of the people; and that voice does not least deserve to be heard, when it calls out for mercy. There is now a very general desire that Dodd’s life should be spared. More is not wished; and, perhaps, this is not too much to be granted.</p>
			<p>“If you, Sir, have any opportunity of enforcing these reasons, you may, perhaps, think them worthy of consideration: but whatever you determine, I most respectfully intreat that you will be pleased to pardon for this intrusion, Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most obedient</p>
			<p>“And most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>It has been confidently circulated, with invidious remarks, that to this letter no attention whatever was paid by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jenkinson (afterwards Earl of Liverpool<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3276" id="noteref-3276" epub:type="noteref">3276</a>), and that he did not even deign to show the common civility of owning the receipt of it. I could not but wonder at such conduct in the noble Lord, whose own character and just elevation in life, I thought, must have impressed him with all due regard for great abilities and attainments. As the story had been much talked of, and apparently <a id="III-page-147" />from good authority, I could not but have animadverted upon it in this work, had it been as was alleged; but from my earnest love of truth, and having found reason to think that there might be a mistake, I presumed to write to his Lordship, requesting an explanation; and it is with the sincerest pleasure that I am enabled to assure the world, that there is no foundation for it, the fact being, that owing to some neglect, or accident, Johnson’s letter never came to Lord Hawkesbury’s hands. I should have thought it strange indeed, if that noble Lord had undervalued my illustrious friend; but instead of this being the case, his Lordship, in the very polite answer with which he was pleased immediately to honour me, thus expresses himself:⁠—“I have always respected the memory of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, and admire his writings; and I frequently read many parts of them with pleasure and great improvement.”</p>
			<p>All applications for the Royal Mercy having failed, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd prepared himself for death; and, with a warmth of gratitude, wrote to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson as follows:</p>
			<p>“June 25, <i>Midnight</i>.</p>
			<p>“Accept, thou <em>great</em> and <em>good</em> heart, my earnest and fervent thanks and prayers for all thy benevolent and kind efforts in my behalf.⁠—Oh! <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson! as I sought your knowledge at an early hour in life, would to heaven I had cultivated the love and acquaintance of so excellent a man!⁠—I pray GOD most sincerely to bless you with the highest transports⁠—the infelt satisfaction of <em>humane</em> and benevolent exertions!⁠—And admitted, as I trust I shall be, to the realms of bliss before you, I shall hail <em>your</em> arrival there with transports, and rejoice to acknowledge that you was my Comforter, my Advocate and my <em>Friend</em>! GOD <em>be ever</em> with <em>you</em>!”</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson lastly wrote to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd this solemn and soothing letter:</p>
			<p>“To THE REVEREND DR. DODD.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“That which is appointed to all men is now coming upon you. Outward circumstances, the eyes and the thoughts of men, are below the notice of an immortal being about to stand the trial for eternity, before the Supreme Judge of heaven and earth. Be comforted: your crime, morally or religiously considered, has no very deep dye of turpitude. It corrupted no man’s principles; it attacked no man’s life. It involved only a temporary and reparable injury. Of this, <a id="III-page-148" />and of all other sins, you are earnestly to repent; and may GOD, who knoweth our frailty, and desireth not our death, accept your repentance, for the sake of his Son JESUS CHRIST our Lord.</p>
			<p>“In requital of those well-intended offices which you are pleased so emphatically to acknowledge, let me beg that you make in your devotions one petition for my eternal welfare. I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your affectionate servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“June 26, 1777.”</p>
			<p>Under the copy of this letter I found written, in Johnson’s own hand,<br/>
			“Next day, June 27, he was executed.”</p>
			<p>To conclude this interesting episode with an useful application, let us now attend to the reflections of Johnson at the end of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Occasional Papers</i>, concerning the unfortunate <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd:</p>
			<p>“Such were the last thoughts of a man whom we have seen exulting in popularity, and sunk in shame. For his reputation, which no man can give to himself, those who conferred it are to answer. Of his public ministry the means of judging were sufficiently attainable. He must be allowed to preach well, whose sermons strike his audience with forcible conviction. Of his life, those who thought it consistent with his doctrine, did not originally form false notions. He was at first what he endeavoured to make others; but the world broke down his resolution, and he in time ceased to exemplify his own instructions.</p>
			<p>“Let those who are tempted to his faults, tremble at his punishment; and those whom he impressed from the pulpit with religious sentiments, endeavour to confirm them, by considering the regret and self-abhorrence with which he reviewed in prison his deviations from rectitude.”</p>
			<p>Johnson gave us this evening, in his happy discriminative manner, a portrait of the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fitzherbert, of Derbyshire. “There was (said he) no sparkle, no brilliancy in Fitzherbert; but I never knew a man who was so generally acceptable.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3277" id="noteref-3277" epub:type="noteref">3277</a> He made everybody quite easy, overpowered nobody by the superiority of his talents, made no man think worse of himself by being his rival, seemed always to listen, did not oblige you to <a id="III-page-149" />hear much from him, and did not oppose what you said. Everybody liked him; but he had no friend, as I understand the word, nobody with whom he exchanged intimate thoughts.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3278" id="noteref-3278" epub:type="noteref">3278</a> People were willing to think well of everything about him. A gentleman was making an affected rant, as many people do, of great feelings about ‘his dear son,’ who was at school near London; how anxious he was lest he might be ill, and what he would give to see him. ‘Can’t you (said Fitzherbert,) take a post-chaise and go to him.’ This, to be sure, <em>finished</em> the affected man, but there was not much in it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3279" id="noteref-3279" epub:type="noteref">3279</a> However, this was circulated as wit for a whole winter, and I believe part of a summer too; a proof that he was no very witty man. He was an instance of the truth of the observation, that a man will please more upon the whole by negative qualities than by positive; by never offending, than by giving a great deal of delight. In the first place, men hate more steadily than they love; and if I have said something to hurt a man once, I shall not get the better of this, by saying many things to please him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3280" id="noteref-3280" epub:type="noteref">3280</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-150">Tuesday, September 16, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson having mentioned to me the extraordinary size and price of some cattle reared by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor, I rode out with our host, surveyed his farm, and was shown one cow which he had sold for a hundred and twenty guineas, and another for which he had been offered a hundred and thirty.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3281" id="noteref-3281" epub:type="noteref">3281</a> Taylor thus described to me his old schoolfellow and friend, Johnson: “He is a man of a very clear head, great power of words, and a very gay imagination; but there is no disputing with him. He will not hear you, and having a louder voice than you, must roar you down.”</p>
			<p>In the afternoon I tried to get <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson to like the Poems of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hamilton of Bangour,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3282" id="noteref-3282" epub:type="noteref">3282</a> which I had brought with me: I had been much pleased with them at a very early age; the impression still remained on my mind; it was confirmed by the opinion of my friend the Honourable Andrew Erskine, himself both a good poet<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3283" id="noteref-3283" epub:type="noteref">3283</a> and a good critic, who thought Hamilton as true a poet as ever wrote, and that his not having fame was unaccountable. Johnson, upon repeated occasions, while I was at Ashbourne, talked slightingly of Hamilton. He said there was no power of thinking in his verses, nothing that strikes one, nothing better than what you generally find in magazines; and that the highest praise they deserved was, that they were very <a id="III-page-151" />well for a gentleman to hand about among his friends. He said the imitation of <i xml:lang="la">Ne sit ancillae tibi amor</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3284" id="noteref-3284" epub:type="noteref">3284</a> <abbr>etc.</abbr> was too solemn; he read part of it at the beginning. He read the beautiful pathetic song, “Ah the poor shepherd’s mournful fate”, and did not seem to give attention to what I had been used to think tender elegant strains, but laughed at the rhyme, in Scotch pronunciation, <q>wishes and blushes</q>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3285" id="noteref-3285" epub:type="noteref">3285</a> reading <q>wushes</q>⁠—and there he stopped. He owned that the epitaph on Lord Newhall was pretty well done. He read the “Inscription in a Summerhouse”, and a little of the imitations of Horace’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Epistles</i>; but said he found nothing to make him desire to read on. When I urged that there were some good poetical passages in the book. “Where (said he,) will you find so large a collection without some?” I thought the description of Winter might obtain his approbation:</p>
			<p>“See<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3286" id="noteref-3286" epub:type="noteref">3286</a> Winter, from the frozen north<br/>
			Drives his iron chariot forth!<br/>
			His grisly hand in icy chains<br/>
			Fair Tweeda’s silver flood constrains,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>He asked why an “<em>iron</em> chariot”? and said “icy chains’ was an old image.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3287" id="noteref-3287" epub:type="noteref">3287</a> I was struck with the uncertainty of taste, and somewhat sorry that a poet whom I had long read with fondness, was not approved by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson. I comforted myself with thinking that the beauties were too delicate for his robust perceptions. Garrick maintained that he had not a taste for the finest productions of genius: but I was sensible, that when he took the trouble to analyse critically, he generally convinced us that he was right.</p>
			<p>In the evening, the Reverend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Seward,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3288" id="noteref-3288" epub:type="noteref">3288</a> of Lichfield, who was passing through Ashbourne in his way home, drank tea with us. Johnson described him thus:⁠—“Sir, his ambition is to <a id="III-page-152" />be a fine talker; so he goes to Buxton, and such places, where he may find companies to listen to him. And, Sir, he is valetudinarian, one of those who are always mending themselves. I do not know a more disagreeable character than a valetudinarian, who thinks he may do anything that is for his ease, and indulges himself in the grossest freedoms: Sir, he brings himself to the state of a hog in a stye.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3289" id="noteref-3289" epub:type="noteref">3289</a>”</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor’s nose happening to bleed, he said, it was because he had omitted to have himself blooded four days after a quarter of a year’s interval. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, who was a great dabbler in physic,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3290" id="noteref-3290" epub:type="noteref">3290</a> disapproved much of periodical bleeding.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3291" id="noteref-3291" epub:type="noteref">3291</a> “For (said <a id="III-page-153" />he) you accustom yourself to an evacuation which Nature cannot perform of herself, and therefore she cannot help you, should you, from forgetfulness or any other cause, omit it; so you may be suddenly suffocated. You may accustom yourself to other periodical evacuations, because should you omit them, Nature can supply the omission; but Nature cannot open a vein to blood you.”⁠—“I do not like to take an emetic, (said Taylor,) for fear of breaking some small vessels.”⁠—“Poh! (said Johnson,) if you have so many things that will break, you had better break your neck at once, and there’s an end on’t. You will break no small vessels’ (blowing with high derision).</p>
			<p>I mentioned to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, that David Hume’s persisting in his infidelity, when he was dying, shocked me much. JOHNSON. “Why should it shock you, Sir? Hume owned he had never read the New Testament with attention. Here then was a man, who had been at no pains to inquire into the truth of religion, and had continually turned his mind the other way. It was not to be expected that the prospect of death would alter his way of thinking, unless GOD should send an angel to set him right.” I said, I had reason to believe that the thought of annihilation gave Hume no pain. JOHNSON. “It was not so, Sir.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3292" id="noteref-3292" epub:type="noteref">3292</a> He had a vanity in being thought easy. It is more probable that he should assume an appearance of ease, than that so very improbable a thing should be, as a man not afraid of going (as, in spite of his delusive theory, he cannot be sure but he may go,) into an unknown state, and not being uneasy at leaving all he knew. And you are to consider, that upon his own principle of annihilation he had no motive to speak the truth.” The hrror of death which I had always observed in <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, appeared strong tonight. I ventured to tell him, that I had been, for moments in my life, not afraid of death; therefore I could suppose another man in that state of mind for a considerable space of time. He said, “he never had a moment in which death was not terrible to him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3293" id="noteref-3293" epub:type="noteref">3293</a>” He added, that it had been observed, that <a id="III-page-154" />scarce any man<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3294" id="noteref-3294" epub:type="noteref">3294</a> dies in public, but with apparent resolution; from that desire of praise which never quits us. I said, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd seemed to be willing to die, and full of hopes of happiness. “Sir, (said he,) <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd would have given both his hands and both his legs to have lived. The better a man is, the more afraid he is of death, having a clearer view of infinite purity.” He owned, that our being in an unhappy uncertainty as to our salvation, was mysterious; and said, “Ah! we must wait till we are in another state of being, to have many things explained to us.” Even the powerful mind of Johnson seemed foiled by futurity. But I thought, that the gloom of uncertainty in solemn religious speculation, being mingled with hope, was yet more consolatory than the emptiness of infidelity. A man can live in thick air, but perishes in an exhausted receiver.</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson was much pleased with a remark which I told him was made to me by General Paoli:⁠—“That it is impossible not to be afraid of death; and that those who at the time of dying are not afraid, are not thinking of death, but of applause, or something else, which keeps death out of their sight: so that all men are equally afraid of death when they see it; only some have a power of turning their sight away from it better than others.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3295" id="noteref-3295" epub:type="noteref">3295</a>”</p>
			<p>On Wednesday, September 17, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Butter, physician at Derby, drank tea with us; and it was settled that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson and I should go on Friday and dine with him. Johnson said, “I’m glad of this.” He seemed weary of the uniformity of life at <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor’s.</p>
			<p id="III-page-155">Talking of biography, I said, in writing a life, a man’s peculiarities should be mentioned, because they mark his character. JOHNSON. “Sir, there is no doubt as to peculiarities: the question is, whether a man’s vices should be mentioned; for instance, whether it should be mentioned that Addison and Parnell drank too freely: for people will probably more easily indulge in drinking from knowing this; so that more ill may be done by the example, than good by telling the whole truth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3296" id="noteref-3296" epub:type="noteref">3296</a>” Here was an instance of his varying from himself in talk; for when Lord Hailes and he sat one morning calmly conversing in my house at Edinburgh, I well remember that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson maintained, that “If a man is to write A <em>Panegyrick</em>, he may keep vices out of sight; but if he professes to write <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Life</i>, he must represent it really as it was:” and when I objected to the danger of telling that Parnell drank to excess, he said, that “it would produce an instructive caution to avoid drinking, when it was seen, that even the learning and genius of Parnell could be debased by it.” And in the Hebrides he maintained, as appears from my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3297" id="noteref-3297" epub:type="noteref">3297</a> that a man’s intimate friend should mention his faults, if he writes his life.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3298" id="noteref-3298" epub:type="noteref">3298</a></p>
			<p>He had this evening, partly, I suppose, from the spirit of contradiction to his Whig friend, a violent argument with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor, as to the inclinations of the people of England at this time towards the Royal Family of Stuart. He grew so outrageous as to say, “that, if England were fairly polled, the present King <a id="III-page-156" />would be sent away tonight, and his adherents hanged tomorrow.” Taylor, who was as violent a Whig as Johnson was a Tory, was roused by this to a pitch of bellowing. He denied, loudly, what Johnson said; and maintained, that there was an abhorrence against the Stuart family, though he admitted that the people were not much attached to the present King.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3299" id="noteref-3299" epub:type="noteref">3299</a> JOHNSON. “Sir, the state of the country is this: the people knowing it to be agreed on all hands that this King has not the hereditary right to the crown, and there being no hope that he who has it can be restored, have grown cold and indifferent upon the subject of loyalty, and have no warm attachment to any King. They would not, therefore, risk anything to restore the exiled family. They would not give twenty shillings a piece to bring it about. But, if a mere vote could do it, there would be twenty to one; at least, there would be a very great majority of voices for it. For, Sir, you are to consider, that all those who think a King has a right to his crown, as a man has to his estate, which is the just opinion, would be for restoring the King who certainly has the hereditary right, could he be trusted with it; in which there would be no danger now, when laws and everything else are so much advanced: and every King will govern by the laws. And you must also consider, Sir, that there is nothing on the other side to oppose to this; for it is not alleged by anyone that the present family has any inherent right<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3300" id="noteref-3300" epub:type="noteref">3300</a>: so that the Whigs could not have a contest between two rights.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-157"><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor admitted, that if the question as to hereditary right were to be tried by a poll of the people of England, to be sure the abstract doctrine would be given in favour of the family of Stuart; but he said, the conduct of that family, which occasioned their expulsion, was so fresh in the minds of the people, that they would not vote for a restoration. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, I think, was contented with the admission as to the hereditary right, leaving the original point in dispute, <i>viz</i>. what the people upon the whole would do, taking in right and affection; for he said, people were afraid of a change, even though they think it right. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor said something of the slight foundation of the hereditary right, of the house of Stuart. “Sir, (said Johnson,) the house of Stuart succeeded to the full right of both the houses of York and Lancaster, whose common source had the undisputed right. A right to a throne is like a right to anything else. Possession is sufficient, where no better right can be shown. This was the case with the Royal Family of England, as it is now with the King of France: for as to the first beginning of the right, we are in the dark.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3301" id="noteref-3301" epub:type="noteref">3301</a>”</p>
			<p>Thursday, September 18. Last night <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson had proposed that the crystal lustre, or chandelier, in <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor’s large room, should be lighted up some time or other. Taylor said, it should be lighted up next night. “That will do very well, (said I,) for it is <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s birthday.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3302" id="noteref-3302" epub:type="noteref">3302</a>” When we were in the Isle of Sky, Johnson had desired me not to mention his birthday. He did not seem pleased at this time that I mentioned it, and said (somewhat sternly) “he would <em>not</em> have the lustre lighted the next day.”</p>
			<p>Some ladies, who had been present yesterday when I mentioned his birthday, came to dinner today, and plagued him unintentionally, by wishing him joy. I know not why he disliked having his birthday mentioned, unless it were that it reminded him of his approaching nearer to death, of which he had a constant dread.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3303" id="noteref-3303" epub:type="noteref">3303</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-158">I mentioned to him a friend of mine who was formerly gloomy from low spirits, and much distressed by the fear of death, but was now uniformly placid, and contemplated his dissolution without any perturbation. “Sir, (said Johnson,) this is only a disordered imagination taking a different turn.”</p>
			<p>We talked of a collection being made of all the English Poets who had published a volume of poems. Johnson told me “that a <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coxeter,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3304" id="noteref-3304" epub:type="noteref">3304</a> whom he knew, had gone the greatest length towards this; having collected, I think, about five hundred volumes of poets whose works were little known; but that upon his death Tom Osborne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3305" id="noteref-3305" epub:type="noteref">3305</a> bought them, and they were dispersed, which he thought a pity, as it was curious to see any series complete; and in every volume of poems something good may be found.”</p>
			<p>He observed, that a gentleman of eminence in literature had got into a bad style of poetry of late.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3306" id="noteref-3306" epub:type="noteref">3306</a> “He puts (said he) a very common thing in a strange dress till he does not know it himself, and thinks other people do not know it.” BOSWELL. “That is owing to his being so much versant in old English poetry.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3307" id="noteref-3307" epub:type="noteref">3307</a>” JOHNSON. “What is the purpose, Sir? If I <a id="III-page-159" />say a man is drunk, and you tell me it is owing to his taking much drink, the matter is not mended. No, Sir, ⸺ has taken to an odd mode. For example; he’d write thus:</p>
			<p>‘Hermit hoar, in solemn cell,<br/>
			Wearing out life’s evening gray.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3308" id="noteref-3308" epub:type="noteref">3308</a>’</p>
			<p><q>Gray evening</q> is common enough; but <q>evening gray</q> he’d think fine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3309" id="noteref-3309" epub:type="noteref">3309</a>⁠—Stay;⁠—we’ll make out the stanza:</p>
			<p>‘Hermit hoar, in solemn cell,<br/>
			Wearing out life’s evening gray;<br/>
			Smite thy bosom, sage, and tell,<br/>
			What is bliss? and which the way?’ ”</p>
			<p>BOSWELL. “But why smite his bosom, Sir?” JOHNSON. “Why to show he was in earnest,” (smiling).⁠—He at an after period added the following stanza:</p>
			<p>“Thus I spoke; and speaking sigh’d;<br/>
			—Scarce repress’d the starting tear;⁠—<br/>
			When the smiling sage reply’d⁠—<br/>
			—Come, my lad, and drink some beer.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3310" id="noteref-3310" epub:type="noteref">3310</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-160">I cannot help thinking the first stanza very good solemn poetry, as also the three first lines of the second. Its last line is an excellent burlesque surprise on gloomy sentimental enquirers. And, perhaps, the advice is as good as can be given to a low-spirited dissatisfied being:⁠—“Don’t trouble your head with sickly thinking: take a cup, and be merry.”</p>
			<p>Friday, September 19, after breakfast <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson and I set out in <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor’s chaise to go to Derby. The day was fine, and we resolved to go by Keddlestone, the seat of Lord Scarsdale, that I might see his Lordship’s fine house. I was struck with the magnificence of the building; and the extensive park, with the finest verdure, covered with deer, and cattle, and sheep, delighted me. The number of old oaks, of an immense size, filled me with a sort of respectful admiration: for one of them sixty pounds was offered. The excellent smooth gravel roads; the large piece of water formed by his Lordship from some small brooks, with a handsome barge upon it; the venerable Gothick church, now the family chapel, just by the house; in short, the grand group of objects agitated and distended my mind in a most agreeable manner. “One should think (said I) that the proprietor of all this <em>must</em> be happy.”⁠—“Nay, Sir, (said Johnson,) all this excludes but one evil⁠—poverty.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3311" id="noteref-3311" epub:type="noteref">3311</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-161">Our names were sent up, and a well-dressed elderly housekeeper, a most distinct articulator, showed us the house; which I need not describe, as there is an account of it published in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Adam’s Works in Architecture</i>. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson thought better of it today than when he saw it before;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3312" id="noteref-3312" epub:type="noteref">3312</a> for he had lately attacked it violently, saying, “It would do excellently for a town-hall. The large room with the pillars (said he) would do for the Judges to sit in at the assizes; the circular room for a jury-chamber; and the room above for prisoners.” Still he thought the large room ill lighted, and of no use but for dancing in; and the bedchambers but indifferent rooms; and that the immense sum which it cost was injudiciously laid out. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor had put him in mind of his <em>appearing</em> pleased with the house. “But (said he) that was when Lord Scarsdale was present. Politeness obliges us to appear pleased with a man’s works when he is present. No man will be so ill bred as to question you. You may therefore pay compliments without saying what is not true. I should say to Lord Scarsdale of his large room, ‘My Lord, this is the most <em>costly</em> room that I ever saw;’ which is true.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Manningham, physician in London, who was visiting at Lord Scarsdale’s, accompanyed us through many of the rooms, and soon afterwards my Lord himself, to whom <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson was known, appeared, and did the honours of the house. We talked of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton. Johnson, with a warm vehemence of affectionate regard, exclaimed, “The earth does not bear a worthier man than Bennet Langton.” We saw a good many fine pictures, which I think are described in one of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Young’s Tours</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3313" id="noteref-3313" epub:type="noteref">3313</a> There is a printed catalogue of them which the housekeeper put into my hand; I should like to view them at leisure. I was much struck with Daniel interpreting Nebuchadnezzar’s dream by Rembrandt. We were shown a pretty large library. In his Lordship’s dressing-room lay Johnson’s small <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i>: he showed it to me, with some eagerness, saying, <a id="III-page-162" />“Look’ye! <i xml:lang="la">Quae terra nostri non plena laboris</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3314" id="noteref-3314" epub:type="noteref">3314</a>” He observed, also, Goldsmith’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Animated Nature</i>; and said, “Here’s our friend! The poor Doctor would have been happy to hear of this.”</p>
			<p>In our way, Johnson strongly expressed his love of driving fast in a post-chaise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3315" id="noteref-3315" epub:type="noteref">3315</a> “If (said he) I had no duties, and no reference to futurity, I would spend my life in driving briskly in a post-chaise with a pretty woman; but she should be one who could understand me, and would add something to the conversation.” I observed, that we were this day to stop just where the Highland army did in 1745.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3316" id="noteref-3316" epub:type="noteref">3316</a> JOHNSON. “It was a noble attempt.” BOSWELL. “I wish we could have an authentic history of it.” JOHNSON. “If you were not an idle dog you might write it, by collecting from everybody what they can tell, and putting down your authorities.” BOSWELL. “But I could not have the advantage of it in my lifetime.” JOHNSON. “You might have the satisfaction of its fame, by printing it in Holland; and as to profit, consider how long it was before writing came to be considered in a pecuniary view. Baretti says, he is the first man that ever received copy-money in Italy.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3317" id="noteref-3317" epub:type="noteref">3317</a>” I said that I would endeavour to do what <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson suggested; and I thought that I might write so as to venture to publish my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Civil War in Great-Britain in 1745 and 1746</i> without being obliged to go to a foreign press.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3318" id="noteref-3318" epub:type="noteref">3318</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-163">When we arrived at Derby, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Butter accompanied us to see the manufactory of china there. I admired the ingenuity and delicate art with which a man fashioned clay into a cup, a saucer, or a teapot, while a boy turned round a wheel to give the mass rotundity. I thought this as excellent in its species of power, as making good verses in <em>its</em> species. Yet I had no respect for this potter. Neither, indeed, has a man of any extent of thinking for a mere verse-maker, in whose numbers, however perfect, there is no poetry, no mind. The china was beautiful, but <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson justly observed it was too dear; for that he could have vessels of silver, of the same size, as cheap as what were here made of porcelain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3319" id="noteref-3319" epub:type="noteref">3319</a></p>
			<p>I felt a pleasure in walking about Derby such as I always have in walking about any town to which I am not accustomed. There is an immediate sensation of novelty; and one speculates on the way in which life is passed in it, which, although there is a sameness everywhere upon the whole, is yet minutely diversified. The minute diversities in everything are wonderful. Talking of shaving the other night at <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor’s, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson said, “Sir, of a thousand shavers, two do not shave so much alike as not to be distinguished.” I thought this not possible, till he specified so many of the varieties in shaving;⁠—holding the razor more or less perpendicular;⁠—drawing long or short strokes;⁠—beginning at the upper part of the face, or the under;⁠—at the right side or the left side. Indeed, when one considers what variety of sounds can be uttered by the windpipe, in the compass of a very small aperture, we may be convinced how many degrees of difference there may be in the application of a razor.</p>
			<p>We dined with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Butter, whose lady is daughter of my cousin Sir John Douglas, whose grandson is now presumptive heir of the noble family of Queensberry. Johnson and he had a good deal of medical conversation. Johnson said, he had somewhere or other given an account of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Nichols’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3320" id="noteref-3320" epub:type="noteref">3320</a> discourse <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Animá Medicâ</i>. He told us “that whatever a man’s distemper <a id="III-page-164" />was, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Nichols would not attend him as a physician, if his mind was not at ease; for he believed that no medicines would have any influence. He once attended a man in trade, upon whom he found none of the medicines he prescribed had any effect: he asked the man’s wife privately whether his affairs were not in a bad way? She said no. He continued his attendance some time, still without success. At length the man’s wife told him, she had discovered that her husband’s affairs <em>were</em> in a bad way. When Goldsmith was dying, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Turton said to him, ‘Your pulse is in greater disorder than it should be, from the degree of fever which you have: is your mind at ease?’ Goldsmith answered it was not.”</p>
			<p>After dinner, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Butter went with me to see the silk-mill which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Lombe had<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3321" id="noteref-3321" epub:type="noteref">3321</a> had a patent for, having brought away the contrivance from Italy. I am not very conversant with mechanics; but the simplicity of this machine, and its multiplied operations, struck me with an agreeable surprise. I had learnt from <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, during this interview, not to think with a dejected indifference of the works of art, and the pleasures of life, because life is uncertain and short; but to consider such indifference as a failure of reason, a morbidness of mind; for happiness should be cultivated as much as we can, and the objects which are instrumental to it should be steadily considered as of importance,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3322" id="noteref-3322" epub:type="noteref">3322</a> with a reference not only to ourselves, but to multitudes in successive ages. Though it is proper to value small parts, as</p>
			<p>“Sands make the mountain, moments make the year;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3323" id="noteref-3323" epub:type="noteref">3323</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-165">yet we must contemplate, collectively, to have a just estimation of objects. One moment’s being uneasy or not, seems of no consequence; yet this may be thought of the next, and the next, and so on, till there is a large portion of misery. In the same way one must think of happiness, of learning, of friendship. We cannot tell the precise moment when friendship is formed. As in filling a vessel drop by drop, there is at last a drop which makes it run over; so in a series of kindnesses there is at last one which makes the heart run over. We must not divide objects of our attention into minute parts, and think separately of each part. It is by contemplating a large mass of human existence, that a man, while he sets a just value on his own life, does not think of his death as annihilating all that is great and pleasing in the world, as if actually <q>contained in his mind</q>, according to Berkeley’s reverie.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3324" id="noteref-3324" epub:type="noteref">3324</a> If his imagination be not sickly and feeble, it “wings its distant way<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3325" id="noteref-3325" epub:type="noteref">3325</a>” far beyond himself, and views the world in unceasing activity of every sort. It must be acknowledged, however, that Pope’s plaintive reflection, that all things would be as gay as ever, on the day of his death, is natural and common.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3326" id="noteref-3326" epub:type="noteref">3326</a> We are apt to transfer to all around us our own gloom, <a id="III-page-166" />without considering that at any given point of time there is, perhaps, as much youth and gaiety in the world as at another. Before I came into this life, in which I have had so many pleasant scenes, have not thousands and ten thousands of deaths and funerals happened, and have not families been in grief for their nearest relations? But have those dismal circumstances at all affected <em>me</em>? Why then should the gloomy scenes which I experience, or which I know, affect others? Let us guard against imagining that there is an end of felicity upon earth, when we ourselves grow old, or are unhappy.</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson told us at tea, that when some of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd’s pious friends were trying to console him by saying that he was going to leave “a wretched world,” he had honesty enough not to join in the cant<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3327" id="noteref-3327" epub:type="noteref">3327</a>:⁠—“No, no (said he,) it has been a very agreeable world to me.” Johnson added, “I respect Dodd for thus speaking the truth; for, to be sure, he had for several years enjoyed a life of great voluptuousness.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3328" id="noteref-3328" epub:type="noteref">3328</a>”</p>
			<p>He told us, that Dodd’s city friends stood by him so, that a thousand pounds were ready to be given to the gaoler, if he would let him escape. He added, that he knew a friend of Dodd’s, who walked about Newgate for some time on the evening before the day of his execution, with five hundred pounds in his pocket, ready to be paid to any of the turnkeys who could get him out: but it was too late; for he was watched with much circumspection.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3329" id="noteref-3329" epub:type="noteref">3329</a> He said, Dodd’s friends had an image of him made of wax, which was to have been left in his place; and he believed it was carried into the prison.</p>
			<p id="III-page-167">Johnson disapproved of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd’s leaving the world persuaded that “The Convict’s Address to his unhappy Brethren” was of his own writing.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3330" id="noteref-3330" epub:type="noteref">3330</a> “But, Sir, (said I,) you contributed to the deception; for when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Seward expressed a doubt to you that it was not Dodd’s own, because it had a great deal more force of mind in it than anything known to be his, you answered⁠—‘Why should you think so? Depend upon it, Sir, when a man knows he is to be hanged in a fortnight, it concentrates his mind wonderfully.’ ” JOHNSON. “Sir, as Dodd got it from me to pass as his own, while that could do him any good, there was an <em>implied promise</em> that I should not own it. To own it, therefore, would have been telling a lie, with the addition of breach of promise, which was worse than simply telling a lie to make it be believed it was Dodd’s. Besides, Sir, I did not <em>directly</em> tell a lie: I left the matter uncertain. Perhaps I thought that Seward would not believe it the less to be mine for what I said; but I would not put it in his power to say I had owned it.”</p>
			<p>He praised Blair’s sermons: “Yet,” said he, (willing to let us see he was aware that fashionable fame, however deserved, is not always the most lasting,) “perhaps, they may not be reprinted after seven years; at least not after Blair’s death.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3331" id="noteref-3331" epub:type="noteref">3331</a>”</p>
			<p>He said, “Goldsmith was a plant that flowered late.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3332" id="noteref-3332" epub:type="noteref">3332</a> There <a id="III-page-168" />appeared nothing remarkable about him when he was young; though when he had got high in fame, one of his friends<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3333" id="noteref-3333" epub:type="noteref">3333</a> began to recollect something of his being distinguished at College. Goldsmith in the same manner recollected more of that friend’s early years, as he grew a greater man.”</p>
			<p>I mentioned that Lord Monboddo told me, he awaked every morning at four, and then for his health got up and walked in his room naked, with the window open, which he called taking <q>an air bath</q>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3334" id="noteref-3334" epub:type="noteref">3334</a> after which he went to bed again, and slept two hours more. Johnson, who was always ready to beat down anything that seemed to be exhibited with disproportionate importance, thus observed: “I suppose, Sir, there is no more in it than this, he awakes at four, and cannot sleep till he chills himself, and makes the warmth of the bed a grateful sensation.”</p>
			<p>I talked of the difficulty of rising in the morning. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson told me, “that the learned <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Carter, at that period when she was eager in study, did not awake as early as she wished, and she therefore had a contrivance, that, at a certain hour, her chamber-light should burn a string to which a heavy weight was suspended, which then fell with a strong sudden noise: this roused her from sleep, and then she had no difficulty in getting up.” But I said <em>that</em> was my difficulty; and wished there could be some medicine invented which would make one rise without pain, which I never did, unless after lying in bed a very long time. Perhaps there may be something in the stores of Nature which could do this. I have thought of a pulley to raise me gradually; but that would give me pain, as it would counteract my internal inclination. I would have something that can dissipate the <i>vis inertiae</i>, and give elasticity to the muscles. As I imagine that the human body may be put, by the operation of other substances, into any state in which it has ever been; and as I have experienced a state in which rising from bed was not <a id="III-page-169" />disagreeable, but easy, nay, sometimes agreeable; I suppose that this state may be produced, if we knew by what. We can heat the body, we can cool it; we can give it tension or relaxation; and surely it is possible to bring it into a state in which rising from bed will not be a pain.</p>
			<p>Johnson observed, that “a man should take a sufficient quantity of sleep, which <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Mead says is between seven and nine hours.” I told him, that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cullen said to me, that a man should not take more sleep than he can take at once. JOHNSON. “This rule, Sir, cannot hold in all cases; for many people have their sleep broken by sickness; and surely, Cullen would not have a man to get up, after having slept but an hour. Such a regimen would soon end in a <em>long sleep</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3335" id="noteref-3335" epub:type="noteref">3335</a>” <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor remarked, I think very justly, that “a man who does not feel an inclination to sleep at the ordinary time, instead of being stronger than other people, must not be well; for a man in health has all the natural inclinations to eat, drink, and sleep, in a strong degree.”</p>
			<p>Johnson advised me tonight not to <em>refine</em> in the education of my children. “Life (said he) will not bear refinement: you must do as other people do.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3336" id="noteref-3336" epub:type="noteref">3336</a>”</p>
			<p>As we drove back to Ashbourne, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson recommended to me, as he had often done, to drink water only: “For (said he) you are then sure not to get drunk; whereas if you drink wine you are never sure.” I said, drinking wine was a pleasure which I was unwilling to give up. “Why, Sir, (said he,) there is no doubt that not to drink wine is a great deduction from life; but it may be necessary.” He however owned, that in his opinion a <a id="III-page-170" />free use of wine did not shorten life;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3337" id="noteref-3337" epub:type="noteref">3337</a> and said, he would not give less for the life of a certain Scotch Lord<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3338" id="noteref-3338" epub:type="noteref">3338</a> (whom he named) celebrated for hard drinking, than for that of a sober man. “But stay, (said he, with his usual intelligence, and accuracy of enquiry,) does it take much wine to make him drunk?” I answered, “a great deal either of wine or strong punch.”⁠—“Then (said he) that is the worse.” I presume to illustrate my friend’s observation thus: “A fortress which soon surrenders has its walls less shattered than when a long and obstinate resistance is made.”</p>
			<p>I ventured to mention a person who was as violent a Scotsman as he was an Englishman; and literally had the same contempt for an Englishman compared with a Scotsman, that he had for a Scotsman compared with an Englishman; and that he would say of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, “Damned rascal! to talk as he does, of the Scotch.” This seemed, for a moment, “to give him pause.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3339" id="noteref-3339" epub:type="noteref">3339</a>” It, perhaps, presented his extreme prejudice against the Scotch in a point of view somewhat new to him, by the effect of <em>contrast</em>.</p>
			<p>By the time when we returned to Ashbourne, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor was gone to bed.<br/>
			Johnson and I sat up a long time by ourselves.</p>
			<p>He was much diverted with an article which I showed him in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Critical Review</i> of this year, giving an account of a curious publication, entitled, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Spiritual Diary and Soliloquies</i>, by John Rutty, M.D. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rutty was one of the people called Quakers, a physician of some eminence in Dublin, and author of several works.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3340" id="noteref-3340" epub:type="noteref">3340</a> This Diary, which was kept from 1753 to 1775, the <a id="III-page-171" />year in which he died, and was now published in two volumes octavo, exhibited, in the simplicity of his heart, a minute and honest register of the state of his mind; which, though frequently laughable enough, was not more so than the history of many men would be, if recorded with equal fairness.</p>
			<p>The following specimens were extracted by the Reviewers:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Tenth month, 1753. 23. Indulgence in bed an hour too long. Twelfth month, 17. An hypochondriac obnubilation from wind and indigestion. Ninth month, 28. An overdose of whisky. 29. A dull, cross, choleric day. First month, 1757⁠—22. A little swinish at dinner and repast. 31. Dogged on provocation. Second month, 5. Very dogged or snappish. 14. Snappish on fasting. 26. Cursed snappishness to those under me, on a bodily indisposition. Third month, 11. On a provocation, exercised a dumb resentment for two days, instead of scolding. 22. Scolded too vehemently. 23. Dogged again. Fourth month, 29. Mechanically and sinfully dogged.”</p>
			<p>Johnson laughed heartily at this good Quietist’s self-condemning minutes; particularly at his mentioning, with such a serious regret, occasional instances of “<em>swinishness</em> in eating, and <em>doggedness of temper</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3341" id="noteref-3341" epub:type="noteref">3341</a>” He thought the observations of the Critical Reviewers upon the importance of a man to himself so ingenious and so well expressed, that I shall here introduce them.</p>
			<p>After observing, that “There are few writers who have gained any reputation by recording their own actions,” they say:⁠—</p>
			<p id="III-page-172">“We may reduce the egotists to four classes. In the <em>first</em> we have Julius Caesar: he relates his own transactions; but he relates them with peculiar grace and dignity, and his narrative is supported by the greatness of his character and atchievements. In the <em>second</em> class we have Marcus Antoninus: this writer has given us a series of reflections on his own life; but his sentiments are so noble, his morality so sublime, that his meditations are universally admired. In the <em>third</em> class we have some others of tolerable credit, who have given importance to their own private history by an intermixture of literary anecdotes, and the occurrences of their own times: the celebrated <i>Huetius</i> has published an entertaining volume upon this plan, ‘<i xml:lang="la">De rebus ad eum pertinentibus</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3342" id="noteref-3342" epub:type="noteref">3342</a>’ In the <em>fourth</em> class we have the journalists, temporal and spiritual: Elias Ashmole, William Lilly, George Whitefield, John Wesley, and a thousand other old women and fanatic writers of memoirs and meditations.”</p>
			<p>I mentioned to him that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hugh Blair, in his lectures on Rhetorick and Belles Lettres, which I heard him deliver at Edinburgh, had animadverted on the Johnsonian style as too pompous; and attempted to imitate it, by giving a sentence of Addison in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Spectator</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 411, in the manner of Johnson. When treating of the utility of the pleasures of imagination in preserving us from vice, it is observed of those “who know not how to be idle and innocent,” that “their very first step out of business is into vice or folly;” which <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Blair supposed would have been expressed in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Rambler</i> thus: “Their very first step out of the regions of business is into the perturbation of vice, or the vacuity of folly.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3343" id="noteref-3343" epub:type="noteref">3343</a>” JOHNSON. “Sir, these are not the words I should have used. No, Sir; the imitators of my style have not hit it. Miss Aikin has done it the best; for she has imitated the sentiment as well as the diction.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3344" id="noteref-3344" epub:type="noteref">3344</a>” I intend, before this work is concluded,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3345" id="noteref-3345" epub:type="noteref">3345</a> to exhibit specimens <a id="III-page-173" />of imitation of my friend’s style in various modes; some caricaturing or mimicing it, and some formed upon it, whether intentionally or with a degree of similarity to it, of which, perhaps, the writers were not conscious.</p>
			<p>In Baretti’s Review, which he published in Italy, under the title of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Frusta Letteraria</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3346" id="noteref-3346" epub:type="noteref">3346</a> it is observed, that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Robertson the historian had formed his style upon that of <i xml:lang="it">Il celebre Samuele Johnson</i>. My friend himself was of that opinion; for he once said to me, in a pleasant humour, “Sir, if Robertson’s style be faulty, he owes it to me; that is, having too many words, and those too big ones.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3347" id="noteref-3347" epub:type="noteref">3347</a>”</p>
			<p>I read to him a letter which Lord Monboddo had written to me, containing some critical remarks upon the style of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland</i>. His Lordship praised the very fine passage upon landing at Icolmkill;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3348" id="noteref-3348" epub:type="noteref">3348</a> but his own style being exceedingly dry and hard, he disapproved of the richness of Johnson’s language, and of his frequent use of metaphorical expressions. JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, this criticism would be just, if in my style, superfluous words, or words too big for the thoughts, could be pointed out;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3349" id="noteref-3349" epub:type="noteref">3349</a> but this I do not believe can be done. For instance; in the passage which Lord <a id="III-page-174" />Monboddo admires, “We were now treading that illustrious region,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3350" id="noteref-3350" epub:type="noteref">3350</a>” the word <q>illustrious</q>, contributes nothing to the mere narration; for the fact might be told without it: but it is not, therefore, superfluous; for it wakes the mind to peculiar attention, where something of more than usual importance is to be presented. ‘Illustrious!’⁠—for what? and then the sentence proceeds to expand the circumstances connected with Iona. And, Sir, as to metaphorical expression, that is a great excellence in style, when it is used with propriety, for it gives you two ideas for one;⁠—conveys the meaning more luminously, and generally with a perception of delight.”</p>
			<p>He told me, that he had been asked to undertake the new edition of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Biographia Britannica</i>, but had declined it; which he afterwards said to me he regretted.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3351" id="noteref-3351" epub:type="noteref">3351</a> In this regret many will join, because it would have procured us more of Johnson’s most delightful species of writing; and although my friend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Kippis has hitherto discharged the task judiciously, distinctly, and with more impartiality than might have been expected from a Separatist, it were to have been wished that the superintendence of this literary Temple of Fame had been assigned to “a friend to the constitution in Church and State.” We should not then have had it too much crowded with obscure dissenting teachers, doubtless men of merit and worth, but not quite to be numbered amongst “the most eminent persons who have flourished in Great-Britain and Ireland.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3352" id="noteref-3352" epub:type="noteref">3352</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-175">On Saturday, September 30, after breakfast, when Taylor was gone out to his farm, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson and I had a serious conversation by ourselves on melancholy and madness; which he was, I always thought, erroneously inclined to confound together.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3353" id="noteref-3353" epub:type="noteref">3353</a> Melancholy, like “great wit,” may be “near allied to madness;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3354" id="noteref-3354" epub:type="noteref">3354</a>” but there is, in my opinion, a distinct separation between them. When he talked of madness, he was to be understood as speaking of those who were in any great degree disturbed, or as it is commonly expressed, “troubled in mind.” Some of the ancient philosophers held, that all deviations from right reason were madness; and whoever wishes to see the opinions both of ancients and moderns upon this subject, collected and illustrated with a variety of curious facts, may read <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Arnold’s very entertaining work.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3355" id="noteref-3355" epub:type="noteref">3355</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-176">Johnson said, “A madman loves to be with people whom he fears; not as a dog fears the lash; but of whom he stands in awe.” I was struck with the justice of this observation. To be with those of whom a person, whose mind is wavering and dejected, stands in awe, represses and composes an uneasy tumult of spirits, and consoles him with the contemplation of something steady, and at least comparatively great.</p>
			<p>He added, “Madmen are all sensual in the lower stages of the distemper. They are eager for gratifications to sooth their minds, and divert their attention from the misery which they suffer: but when they grow very ill, pleasure is too weak for them, and they seek for pain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3356" id="noteref-3356" epub:type="noteref">3356</a> Employment, Sir, and hardships, prevent melancholy. I suppose in all our army in America there was not one man who went mad.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3357" id="noteref-3357" epub:type="noteref">3357</a>”</p>
			<p>We entered seriously upon a question of much importance to me, which Johnson was pleased to consider with friendly attention. I had long complained to him that I felt myself discontented in Scotland, as too narrow a sphere, and that I wished to make my chief residence in London, the great scene of ambition, instruction, and amusement: a scene, which was to me, comparatively speaking, a heaven upon earth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3358" id="noteref-3358" epub:type="noteref">3358</a> JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, I never knew anyone who had such a <em>gust</em> for London as you have: and I cannot blame you for your wish to live there: yet, Sir, were I in your father’s place, I should not consent to <a id="III-page-177" />your settling there; for I have the old feudal notions, and I should be afraid that Auchinleck would be deserted, as you would soon find it more desirable to have a country-seat in a better climate. I own, however, that to consider it as a <em>duty</em> to reside on a family estate is a prejudice; for we must consider, that working-people get employment equally, and the produce of land is sold equally, whether a great family resides at home or not; and if the rents of an estate be carried to London, they return again in the circulation of commerce; nay, Sir, we must perhaps allow, that carrying the rents to a distance is a good, because it contributes to that circulation. We must, however, allow, that a well-regulated great family may improve a neighbourhood in civility and elegance, and give an example of good order, virtue, and piety; and so its residence at home may be of much advantage. But if a great family be disorderly and vicious, its residence at home is very pernicious to a neighbourhood. There is not now the same inducement to live in the country as formerly; the pleasures of social life are much better enjoyed in town; and there is no longer in the country that power and influence in proprietors of land which they had in old times, and which made the country so agreeable to them. The Laird of Auchinleck now is not near so great a man as the Laird of Auchinleck was a hundred years ago.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3359" id="noteref-3359" epub:type="noteref">3359</a></p>
			<p>I told him, that one of my ancestors never went from home without being attended by thirty men on horseback. Johnson’s shrewdness and spirit of enquiry were exerted upon every occasion. “Pray (said he,) how did your ancestor support his thirty men and thirty horses, when he went at a distance from home, in an age when there was hardly any money in circulation?” I suggested the same difficulty to a friend, who mentioned Douglas’s going to the Holy Land with a numerous train of followers. Douglas could, no doubt, maintain followers enough while living upon his own lands, the produce of which supplied them with food; but he could not carry that food to the Holy Land; and as there was no commerce by which he could be supplied with money, how could he maintain them in foreign countries?</p>
			<p id="III-page-178">I suggested a doubt, that if I were to reside in London, the exquisite zest with which I relished it in occasional visits might go off, and I might grow tired of it. JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, you find no man, at all intellectual, who is willing to leave London. No, Sir, when a man is tired of London, he is tired of life; for there is in London all that life can afford.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3360" id="noteref-3360" epub:type="noteref">3360</a>”</p>
			<p>To obviate his apprehension, that by settling in London I might desert the seat of my ancestors, I assured him, that I had old feudal principles to a degree of enthusiasm; and that I felt all the <i xml:lang="la">dulcedo</i> of the <i xml:lang="la">natale solum</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3361" id="noteref-3361" epub:type="noteref">3361</a> I reminded him, that the Laird of Auchinleck had an elegant house, in front of which he could ride ten miles forward upon his own territories, upon which he had upwards of six hundred people attached to him; that the family seat was rich in natural romantic beauties of rock, wood, and water; and that in my “morn of life,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3362" id="noteref-3362" epub:type="noteref">3362</a>” I had appropriated the finest descriptions in the ancient Classicks to certain scenes there, which were thus associated in my mind. That when all this was considered, I should certainly pass a part of the year at home, and enjoy it the more from variety, and from bringing with me a share of the intellectual stores of the metropolis. He listened to all this, and kindly “hoped it might be as I now supposed.”</p>
			<p>He said, “A country gentleman should bring his lady to visit London as soon as he can, that they may have agreeable topics for conversation when they are by themselves.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-179">As I meditated trying my fortune in Westminster Hall, our conversation turned upon the profession of the law in England. JOHNSON. “You must not indulge too sanguine hopes, should you be called to our bar. I was told, by a very sensible lawyer, that there are a great many chances against any man’s success in the profession of the law; the candidates are so numerous, and those who get large practice so few. He said, it was by no means true that a man of good parts and application is sure of having business, though he, indeed, allowed that if such a man could but appear in a few causes, his merit would be known, and he would get forward; but that the great risk was, that a man might pass half a lifetime in the Courts, and never have an opportunity of showing his abilities.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3363" id="noteref-3363" epub:type="noteref">3363</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-180">We talked of employment being absolutely necessary to preserve the mind from wearying and growing fretful, especially in those who have a tendency to melancholy; and I mentioned to him a saying which somebody had related of an American savage, who, when a European was expatiating on all the advantages of money, put this question: “Will it purchase <em>occupation</em>?” JOHNSON. “Depend upon it, Sir, this saying is too refined for a savage. And, Sir, money <em>will</em> purchase occupation; it will purchase all the conveniences of life; it will purchase variety of company; it will purchase all sorts of entertainment.”</p>
			<p>I talked to him of Forster’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage to the South Seas</i>, which pleased me; but I found he did not like it. “Sir, (said he,) there is a great affectation of fine writing in it.” BOSWELL. “But he carries you along with him.” JOHNSON, “No, Sir; he does not carry <em>me</em> along with him: he leaves me behind him: or rather, indeed, he sets me before him; for he makes me turn over many leaves at a time.”</p>
			<p>On Sunday, September 12,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3364" id="noteref-3364" epub:type="noteref">3364</a> we went to the church of Ashbourne, which is one of the largest and most luminous that I have seen in any town of the same size. I felt great satisfaction in considering that I was supported in my fondness for solemn public worship by the general concurrence and munificence of mankind.</p>
			<p>Johnson and Taylor were so different from each other, that I wondered at their preserving an intimacy.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3365" id="noteref-3365" epub:type="noteref">3365</a> Their having been at school and college together, might, in some degree, account for this;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3366" id="noteref-3366" epub:type="noteref">3366</a> but Sir Joshua Reynolds has furnished me with a <a id="III-page-181" />stronger reason; for Johnson mentioned to him, that he had been told by Taylor he was to be his heir. I shall not take upon me to animadvert upon this; but certain it is, that Johnson paid great attention to Taylor. He now, however, said to me, “Sir, I love him; but I do not love him more; my regard for him does not increase. As it is said in the Apocrypha, ‘his talk is of bullocks<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3367" id="noteref-3367" epub:type="noteref">3367</a>:’ I do not suppose he is very fond of my company.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3368" id="noteref-3368" epub:type="noteref">3368</a> His habits are by no means sufficiently clerical: this he knows that I see; and no man likes to live under the eye of perpetual disapprobation.”</p>
			<p>I have no doubt that a good many sermons were composed for Taylor by Johnson. At this time I found, upon his table, a part of one which he had newly begun to write: and <i xml:lang="la">Concio pro Tayloro</i> appears in one of his diaries. When to these circumstances we add the internal evidence from the power of thinking and style, in the collection which the Reverend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hayes has published, with the <em>significant</em> title of Sermons <em>left for publication</em> by the Reverend John Taylor, LL.D., our conviction will be complete.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3369" id="noteref-3369" epub:type="noteref">3369</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-182">I, however, would not have it thought, that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor, though he could not write like Johnson, (as, indeed, who could?) did not sometimes compose sermons as good as those which we generally have from very respectable divines. He showed me one with notes on the margin in Johnson’s handwriting; and I was present when he read another to Johnson, that he might have his opinion of it, and Johnson said it was “very well.” These, we may be sure, were not Johnson’s; for he was above little arts, or tricks of deception.</p>
			<p>Johnson was by no means of opinion, that every man of a learned profession should consider it as incumbent upon him, or as necessary to his credit, to appear as an author. When in the ardour of ambition for literary fame, I regretted to him one day that an eminent Judge had nothing of it, and therefore would leave no perpetual monument of himself to posterity.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3370" id="noteref-3370" epub:type="noteref">3370</a> “Alas, Sir, (said Johnson) what a mass of confusion should we have, if every Bishop, and every Judge, every Lawyer, Physician, and Divine, were to write books.”</p>
			<p>I mentioned to Johnson a respectable person of a very strong mind, who had little of that tenderness which is common to human nature; as an instance of which, when I suggested to him that he should invite his son, who had been settled ten years in foreign parts,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3371" id="noteref-3371" epub:type="noteref">3371</a> to come home and pay him a visit, his answer was, “No, no, let him mind his business.” JOHNSON. “I do not agree with him, Sir, in this. Getting money is not all a man’s business: to cultivate kindness is a valuable part of the business of life.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-183">In the evening, Johnson, being in very good spirits, entertained us with several characteristical portraits. I regret that any of them escaped my retention and diligence. I found, from experience, that to collect my friend’s conversation so as to exhibit it with any degree of its original flavour, it was necessary to write it down without delay. To record his sayings, after some distance of time, was like preserving or pickling long-kept and faded fruits, or other vegetables, which, when in that state, have little or nothing of their taste when fresh.</p>
			<p>I shall present my readers with a series of what I gathered this evening from the Johnsonian garden.</p>
			<p>“My friend, the late Earl of Corke, had a great desire to maintain the literary character of his family<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3372" id="noteref-3372" epub:type="noteref">3372</a>: he was a genteel man, but did not keep up the dignity of his rank. He was so generally civil, that nobody thanked him for it.”</p>
			<p>“Did we not hear so much said of Jack Wilkes, we should think more highly of his conversation. Jack has great variety of talk, Jack is a scholar, and Jack has the manners of a gentleman.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3373" id="noteref-3373" epub:type="noteref">3373</a> But after hearing his name sounded from pole to pole, as the phoenix of convivial felicity, we are disappointed in his company. He has always been <em>at me</em>: but I would do Jack a kindness, rather than not. The contest is now over.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3374" id="noteref-3374" epub:type="noteref">3374</a>”</p>
			<p>“Garrick’s gaiety of conversation has delicacy and elegance: Foote makes you laugh more; but Foote has the air of a buffoon paid for entertaining the company. He, indeed, well deserves his hire.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3375" id="noteref-3375" epub:type="noteref">3375</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-184">“Colley Cibber once consulted me as to one of his birthday Odes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3376" id="noteref-3376" epub:type="noteref">3376</a> a long time before it was wanted. I objected very freely to several passages. Cibber lost patience, and would not read his Ode to an end. When we had done with criticism, we walked over to Richardson’s, the author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Clarissa</i>, and I wondered to find Richardson displeased that I ‘did not treat Gibber with more <em>respect</em>.’ Now, Sir, to talk of <em>respect for a player</em>!” (smiling disdainfully). BOSWELL. “There, Sir, you are always heretical: you never will allow merit to a player.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3377" id="noteref-3377" epub:type="noteref">3377</a>” JOHNSON. “Merit, Sir! what merit? Do you respect a ropedancer, or a ballad-singer?” BOSWELL. “No, Sir: but we respect a great player, as a man who can conceive lofty sentiments, and can express them gracefully.” JOHNSON. “What, Sir, a fellow who claps a hump on his back, and a lump on his leg, and cries ‘I am Richard the Third’?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3378" id="noteref-3378" epub:type="noteref">3378</a> Nay, Sir, a ballad-singer is a higher man, for he does two things; he repeats and he sings: there is both recitation and music in his performance: the player only recites.” BOSWELL. “My dear Sir! you may turn anything into ridicule. I allow, that a player of farce is not entitled to respect; he does a little thing: but he who can represent exalted characters, and touch the noblest passions, has very respectable powers; and mankind have agreed in admiring great talents for the stage. We must consider, too, that a great player does what very few are capable to do: his art is a very rare faculty. <em>Who</em> can repeat Hamlet’s soliloquy, ‘To be, or not to be,’ as Garrick does it?” JOHNSON. “Anybody may. Jemmy, there (a boy about eight years old, who was in the room), will do it as well in a week.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3379" id="noteref-3379" epub:type="noteref">3379</a>” BOSWELL. “No, no, Sir: and as a proof of the merit of great acting, and of the value which mankind set upon it, Garrick has got a hundred thousand pounds.” JOHNSON. “Is getting a hundred thousand pounds a proof of excellence? That has been done by a scoundrel commissary.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3380" id="noteref-3380" epub:type="noteref">3380</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-185">This was most fallacious reasoning. I was sure, for once, that I had the best side of the argument. I boldly maintained the just distinction between a tragedian and a mere theatrical droll; between those who rouse our terror and pity, and those who only make us laugh. “If (said I) Betterton and Foote were to walk into this room, you would respect Betterton much more than Foote.” JOHNSON. “If Betterton were to walk into this room with Foote, Foote would soon drive him out of it. Foote, Sir, <i>quatenùs</i> Foote, has powers superior to them all.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3381" id="noteref-3381" epub:type="noteref">3381</a>”</p>
			<p>On Monday, September 22, when at breakfast, I unguardedly said to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, “I wish I saw you and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Macaulay<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3382" id="noteref-3382" epub:type="noteref">3382</a> together.” He grew very angry; and, after a pause, while a cloud gathered on his brow, he burst out, “No, Sir; you would not see us quarrel, to make you sport. Don’t you know that it is very uncivil to <em>pit</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3383" id="noteref-3383" epub:type="noteref">3383</a> two people against one another?” Then, checking himself, and wishing to be more gentle, he added, “I do not say you should be hanged or drowned for this; but it <em>is</em> very uncivil.” <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor thought him in the wrong, and spoke to him privately of it; but I afterwards acknowledged to Johnson that I was to blame, for I candidly owned, that I meant to express a desire to see a contest between <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Macaulay and him; but then I knew how the contest would end; so that I was to see him triumph. JOHNSON. “Sir, you cannot be sure how a contest will end; and no man has a right to engage two people in a dispute by which their passions may be inflamed, and they may part with bitter resentment against each other. I would sooner keep company with a man from whom I must guard my pockets, than with a man who contrives to bring me into a dispute with somebody that he may hear it. This is the great fault <a id="III-page-186" />of ⸺,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3384" id="noteref-3384" epub:type="noteref">3384</a> (naming one of our friends) endeavouring to introduce a subject upon which he knows two people in the company differ.” BOSWELL. “But he told me, Sir, he does it for instruction.” JOHNSON. “Whatever the motive be, Sir, the man who does so, does very wrong. He has no more right to instruct himself at such risk, than he has to make two people fight a duel, that he may learn how to defend himself.”</p>
			<p>He found great fault with a gentleman of our acquaintance for keeping a bad table.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3385" id="noteref-3385" epub:type="noteref">3385</a> “Sir, (said he,) when a man is invited to dinner, he is disappointed if he does not get something good. I advised <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale, who has no card-parties at her house, to give sweetmeats, and such good things, in an evening, as are not commonly given, and she would find company enough come to her; for everybody loves to have things which please the palate put in their way, without trouble or preparation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3386" id="noteref-3386" epub:type="noteref">3386</a>” Such was his attention to the <i>minutiae</i> of life and manners.</p>
			<p>He thus characterised the Duke of Devonshire,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3387" id="noteref-3387" epub:type="noteref">3387</a> grandfather of the present representative of that very respectable family: “He was not a man of superior abilities, but he was a man strictly faithful to his word. If, for instance, he had promised you an acorn, and none had grown that year in his woods, he would not have contented himself with that excuse; he would have sent to Denmark for it. So unconditional was he in keeping his word; so high as to the point of honour.” This was a liberal testimony from the Tory Johnson to the virtue of a great Whig nobleman.</p>
			<p id="III-page-187"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burke’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol, on the affairs of America</i>, being mentioned, Johnson censured the composition much,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3388" id="noteref-3388" epub:type="noteref">3388</a> and he ridiculed the definition of a free government, <i>viz</i>. “For any practical purpose, it is what the people think so.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3389" id="noteref-3389" epub:type="noteref">3389</a>”⁠—“I will let the King of France govern me on those conditions, (said he,) for it is to be governed just as I please.” And when <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor talked of a girl being sent to a parish workhouse, and asked how much she could be obliged to work, “Why, (said Johnson,) as much as is reasonable: and what is that? as much as <em>she thinks</em> reasonable.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson obligingly proposed to carry me to see Islam, a romantic scene, now belonging to a family of the name of Port, but formerly the seat of the Congreves.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3390" id="noteref-3390" epub:type="noteref">3390</a> I suppose it is well described in some of the Tours. Johnson described it distinctly and vividly, at which I could not but express to him my wonder; because, though my eyes, as he observed, were better than his, I could not by any means equal him in representing visible objects. I said, the difference between us in this respect was as that between a man who has a bad instrument, but plays well on it, and a man who has a good instrument, on which he can play very imperfectly.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3391" id="noteref-3391" epub:type="noteref">3391</a></p>
			<p>I recollect a very fine amphitheatre, surrounded with hills covered with woods, and walks neatly formed along the side of a rocky steep, on the quarter next the house, with recesses under projections of rock, overshadowed with trees; in one of which recesses, we were told, Congreve wrote his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Old Bachelor</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3392" id="noteref-3392" epub:type="noteref">3392</a> We viewed a remarkable natural curiosity at Islam; two rivers bursting near each other from the rock, not from immediate springs, but after having run for many miles under ground. Plott, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Staffordshire</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3393" id="noteref-3393" epub:type="noteref">3393</a> gives an account of this curiosity; but <a id="III-page-188" />Johnson would not believe it, though we had the attestation of the gardener, who said, he had put in corks, where the river <i>Manyfold</i> sinks into the ground, and had catched them in a net, placed before one of the openings where the water bursts out. Indeed, such subterraneous courses of water are found in various parts of our globe.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3394" id="noteref-3394" epub:type="noteref">3394</a></p>
			<p>Talking of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s unwillingness to believe extraordinary things,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3395" id="noteref-3395" epub:type="noteref">3395</a> I ventured to say, “Sir, you come near Hume’s argument against miracles, ‘That it is more probable witnesses should lie, or be mistaken, than that they should happen.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3396" id="noteref-3396" epub:type="noteref">3396</a>’ ” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, Hume, taking the proposition simply, is right. But the Christian revelation is not proved by the miracles alone, but as connected with prophecies, and with the doctrines in confirmation of which the miracles were wrought.”</p>
			<p>He repeated his observation, that the differences among Christians are really of no consequence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3397" id="noteref-3397" epub:type="noteref">3397</a> “For instance, (said he,) if a Protestant objects to a Papist, ‘You worship images;’ the Papist can answer, ‘I do not insist on <em>your</em> doing it; you may be a very good Papist without it: I do it only as a help to my devotion.’ ” I said, the great article of Christianity is the revelation of immortality. Johnson admitted it was.</p>
			<p>In the evening, a gentleman-farmer, who was on a visit at <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor’s, attempted to dispute with Johnson in favour of Mungo Campbell, who shot Alexander, Earl of Eglintoune<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3398" id="noteref-3398" epub:type="noteref">3398</a> <a id="III-page-189" />upon his having fallen, when retreating from his Lordship, who he believed was about to seize his gun, as he had threatened to do. He said, he should have done just as Campbell did. JOHNSON. “Whoever would do as Campbell did, deserves to be hanged; not that I could, as a juryman, have found him legally guilty of murder; but I am glad they found means to convict him.” The gentleman-farmer said, “A poor man has as much honour as a rich man; and Campbell had <em>that</em> to defend.” Johnson exclaimed, “A poor man has no honour.” The English yeoman, not dismayed, proceeded: “Lord Eglintoune was a damned fool to run on upon Campbell, after being warned that Campbell would shoot him if he did.” Johnson, who could not bear anything like swearing,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3399" id="noteref-3399" epub:type="noteref">3399</a> angrily replied, “He was <em>not</em> a <em>damned</em> fool: he only thought too well of Campbell. He did not believe Campbell would be such a <em>damned</em> scoundrel, as to do so <em>damned</em> a thing.” His emphasis on <em>damned</em>, accompanied with frowning looks, reproved his opponent’s want of decorum in <em>his</em> presence.</p>
			<p>Talking of the danger of being mortified by rejection, when making approaches to the acquaintance of the great, I observed: “I am, however, generally for trying, ‘Nothing venture, nothing have.’ ”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3400" id="noteref-3400" epub:type="noteref">3400</a> JOHNSON. “Very true, Sir; but I have always been more afraid of failing, than hopeful of success.” And, indeed, though he had all just respect for rank, no man ever less courted the favour of the great.</p>
			<p>During this interview at Ashbourne, Johnson seemed to be more uniformly social, cheerful, and alert, than I had almost ever seen him. He was prompt on great occasions and on small. Taylor, who praised everything of his own to excess; in short, “whose geese were all swans,” as the proverb says, expatiated on the excellence of his bulldog, which, he told us, was “perfectly well shaped.” Johnson, after examining the animal <a id="III-page-190" />attentively, thus repressed the vainglory of our host:⁠—“No, Sir, he is <em>not</em> well shaped; for there is not the quick transition from the thickness of the forepart, to the <em>tenuity</em>⁠—the thin part⁠—behind⁠—which a bulldog ought to have.” This <em>tenuity</em> was the only <em>hard word</em> that I heard him use during this interview, and it will be observed, he instantly put another expression in its place. Taylor said, a small bulldog was as good as a large one. JOHNSON, “No, Sir; for, in proportion to his size, he has strength: and your argument would prove, that a good bulldog may be as small as a mouse.” It was amazing how he entered with perspicuity and keenness upon everything that occurred in conversation. Most men, whom I know, would no more think of discussing a question about a bulldog, than of attacking a bull.</p>
			<p>I cannot allow any fragment whatever that floats in my memory concerning the great subject of this work to be lost. Though a small particular may appear trifling to some, it will be relished by others; while every little spark adds something to the general blaze: and to please the true, candid, warm admirers of Johnson, and in any degree increase the splendour of his reputation, I bid defiance to the shafts of ridicule, or even of malignity. Showers of them have been discharged at my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>; yet it still sails unhurt along the stream of time, and, as an attendant upon Johnson,</p>
			<p>“Pursues the triumph, and partakes the gale.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3401" id="noteref-3401" epub:type="noteref">3401</a>”</p>
			<p>One morning after breakfast, when the sun shone bright, we walked out together, and “pored<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3402" id="noteref-3402" epub:type="noteref">3402</a>” for some time with placid indolence upon an artificial waterfall, which <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor had made by building a strong dyke of stone across the river behind the garden.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3403" id="noteref-3403" epub:type="noteref">3403</a> It was now somewhat obstructed by branches of <a id="III-page-191" />trees and other rubbish, which had come down the river, and settled close to it. Johnson, partly from a desire to see it play more freely, and partly from that inclination to activity which will animate, at times, the most inert and sluggish mortal, took a long pole which was lying on a bank, and pushed down several parcels of this wreck with painful assiduity, while I stood quietly by, wondering to behold the sage thus curiously employed, and smiling with an humorous satisfaction each time when he carried his point. He worked till he was quite out of breath; and having found a large dead cat so heavy that he could not move it after several efforts, “Come,” said he, (throwing down the pole,) “<em>you</em> shall take it now;” which I accordingly did, and being a fresh man, soon made the cat tumble over the cascade. This may be laughed at as too trifling to record; but it is a small characteristic trait in the Flemish picture which I give of my friend, and in which, therefore, I mark the most minute particulars. And let it be remembered, that “Aesop at play” is one of the instructive apologues of antiquity.</p>
			<p>I mentioned an old gentleman of our acquaintance whose memory was beginning to fail. JOHNSON. “There must be a diseased mind, where there is a failure of memory at seventy. A man’s head, Sir, must be morbid, if he fails so soon.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3404" id="noteref-3404" epub:type="noteref">3404</a> My friend, being now himself sixty-eight, might think thus: but I imagine, that <q>threescore and ten</q>, the Psalmist’s period of sound human life in later ages, may have a failure, though there be no disease in the constitution.</p>
			<p>Talking of Rochester’s Poems, he said, he had given them to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Steevens to castrate for the edition of the poets, to which he was to write Prefaces. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor (the only time I ever heard him say anything witty)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3405" id="noteref-3405" epub:type="noteref">3405</a> observed, that “if Rochester had been castrated himself, his exceptionable poems would not have been written.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3406" id="noteref-3406" epub:type="noteref">3406</a> I asked if Burnet had not <a id="III-page-192" />given a good Life of Rochester. JOHNSON. “We have a good <em>Death</em>: there is not much <em>Life</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3407" id="noteref-3407" epub:type="noteref">3407</a>”</p>
			<p>I asked whether Prior’s Poems were to be printed entire: Johnson said they were. I mentioned Lord Hailes’s censure of Prior, in his Preface to a collection of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sacred Poems</i>, by various hands, published by him at Edinburgh a great many years ago, where he mentions, “those impure tales which will be the eternal opprobrium of their ingenious author.” JOHNSON. “Sir, Lord Hailes has forgot. There is nothing in Prior that will excite to lewdness. If Lord Hailes thinks there is, he must be more combustible than other people.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3408" id="noteref-3408" epub:type="noteref">3408</a>”</p>
			<p>I instanced the tale of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Paulo Purganti and his Wife</i>. JOHNSON. “Sir, there is nothing there, but that his wife wanted to be kissed when poor Paulo was out of pocket. No, Sir, Prior is a lady’s book. No lady is ashamed to have it standing in her library.”</p>
			<p>The hypochondriac disorder being mentioned, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson did not think it so common as I supposed. “<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor (said he) is the same one day as another. Burke and Reynolds are the same; Beauclerk, except when in pain, is the same. I am not so myself; but this I do not mention commonly.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3409" id="noteref-3409" epub:type="noteref">3409</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-193">I complained of a wretched changefulness, so that I could not preserve, for any long continuance, the same views of anything. It was most comfortable to me to experience, in <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s company, a relief from this uneasiness. His steady vigorous mind held firm before me those objects which my own feeble and tremulous imagination frequently presented, in such a wavering state, that my reason could not judge well of them.</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson advised me today, to have as many books about me as I could; that I might read upon any subject upon which I had a desire for instruction at the time. “What you read <em>then</em> (said he) you will remember; but if you have not a book immediately ready, and the subject moulds in your mind, it is a chance if you again have a desire to study it.” He added, “If a man never has an eager desire for instruction, he should prescribe a task for himself. But it is better when a man reads from immediate inclination.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3410" id="noteref-3410" epub:type="noteref">3410</a>”</p>
			<p>He repeated a good many lines of Horace’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Odes</i>, while we were in the chaise. I remember particularly the Ode <i xml:lang="la">Eheu fugaces</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3411" id="noteref-3411" epub:type="noteref">3411</a></p>
			<p>He said, the dispute as to the comparative excellence of Homer or Virgil<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3412" id="noteref-3412" epub:type="noteref">3412</a> was inaccurate. “We must consider (said he) whether Homer was not the greatest poet, though Virgil may have produced the finest poem. Virgil was indebted to Homer for the whole invention of the structure of an epic poem, and for many of his beauties.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-194">He told me that Bacon was a favourite author with him;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3413" id="noteref-3413" epub:type="noteref">3413</a> but he had never read his works till he was compiling the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">English Dictionary</i>, in which, he said, I might see Bacon very often quoted. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Seward recollects his having mentioned, that a Dictionary of the English Language might be compiled from Bacon’s writings alone,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3414" id="noteref-3414" epub:type="noteref">3414</a> and that he had once an intention of giving an edition of Bacon, at least of his English works, and writing the Life of that great man. Had he executed this intention, there can be no doubt that he would have done it in a most masterly manner. Mallet’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Bacon</i> has no inconsiderable merit as an acute and elegant dissertation relative to its subject; but Mallet’s mind was not comprehensive enough to embrace the vast extent of Lord Verulam’s genius and research. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Warburton therefore observed, with witty justness, “that Mallet, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Bacon</i>, had forgotten that he was a philosopher; and if he should write the Life of the Duke of Marlborough, which he had undertaken to do, he would probably forget that he was a general.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3415" id="noteref-3415" epub:type="noteref">3415</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-195">Wishing to be satisfied what degree of truth there was in a story which a friend of Johnson’s and mine had told me to his disadvantage, I mentioned it to him in direct terms; and it was to this effect: that a gentleman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3416" id="noteref-3416" epub:type="noteref">3416</a> who had lived in great intimacy with him, shown him much kindness, and even relieved him from a sponging-house, having afterwards fallen into bad circumstances, was one day, when Johnson was at dinner with him, seized for debt, and carried to prison; that Johnson sat still undisturbed, and went on eating and drinking; upon which the gentleman’s sister, who was present, could not suppress her indignation: “What, Sir, (said she,) are you so unfeeling, as not even to offer to go to my brother in his distress; you who have been so much obliged to him?” And that Johnson answered, “Madam, I owe him no obligation; what he did for me he would have done for a dog.”</p>
			<p>Johnson assured me, that the story was absolutely false: but like a man conscious of being in the right, and desirous of completely vindicating himself from such a charge, he did not arrogantly rest on a mere denial, and on his general character, but proceeded thus:⁠—“Sir, I was very intimate with that gentleman, and was once relieved by him from an arrest; but I never was present when he was arrested, never knew that he was arrested, and I believe he never was in difficulties after the time when he relieved me. I loved him much; yet, in talking of his general character, I may have said, though I do not remember that I ever did say so, that as his generosity proceeded from no principle, but was a part of his profusion, he would do for a dog what he would do for a friend: but I never applied this remark to any particular instance, and certainly not to his kindness to me. If a profuse man, who does not value his money, and gives a large sum to a whore, gives half as much, or an equally large sum to relieve a friend, it cannot be esteemed as virtue. This was all that I could say of that gentleman; and, if said at all, it must have been said after his death. Sir, I would have gone to the world’s end to relieve him. The remark about the dog, if made by me, was such a sally as might escape one when painting a man highly.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-196">On Tuesday, September 23, Johnson was remarkably cordial to me. It being necessary for me to return to Scotland soon, I had fixed on the next day for my setting out, and I felt a tender concern at the thought of parting with him. He had, at this time, frankly communicated to me many particulars, which are inserted in this work in their proper places; and once, when I happened to mention that the expense of my jaunt would come to much more than I had computed, he said, “Why, Sir, if the expense were to be an inconvenience, you would have reason to regret it: but, if you have had the money to spend, I know not that you could have purchased as much pleasure with it in any other way.”</p>
			<p>During this interview at Ashbourne, Johnson and I frequently talked with wonderful pleasure of mere trifles which had occurred in our tour to the Hebrides; for it had left a most agreeable and lasting impression upon his mind.</p>
			<p>He found fault with me for using the phrase to <q>make</q> money. “Don’t you see (said he) the impropriety of it? To <q>make</q> money is to <em>coin</em> it: you should say <em>get</em> money.” The phrase, however, is, I think, pretty current.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3417" id="noteref-3417" epub:type="noteref">3417</a> But Johnson was at all times jealous of infractions upon the genuine English language, and prompt to repress colloquial barbarisms; such as, <q>pledging myself</q>, for <q>undertaking</q>; <q>line</q>, for <q>department</q>, or <q>branch</q>, as, the <q>civil line</q>, the <q>banking line</q>. He was particularly indignant against the almost universal use of the word <q>idea</q> in the sense of <q>notion</q> or <q>opinion</q>, when it is clear that <q>idea</q> can only signify something of which an image can be formed in the mind.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3418" id="noteref-3418" epub:type="noteref">3418</a> We may have an <q>idea</q> or <q>image</q> of a mountain, a tree, a building; but we cannot surely have an <q>idea</q> or <q>image</q> of an <em>argument</em> or <q>proposition</q>. Yet we hear the sages of the law “delivering their <q>ideas</q> upon the question under consideration;” and the first speakers in parliament “entirely coinciding in the <q>idea</q> which has been ably stated by <a id="III-page-197" />an honourable member;”⁠—or “reprobating an <q>idea</q> unconstitutional, and fraught with the most dangerous consequences to a great and free country.” Johnson called this “modern cant.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3419" id="noteref-3419" epub:type="noteref">3419</a>”</p>
			<p>I perceived that he pronounced the word <q>heard</q>, as if spelt with a double <i epub:type="z3998:phonenem">e</i>, <q>heerd</q>, instead of sounding it <q>herd</q>, as is most usually done. He said, his reason was, that if it was pronounced <q>herd</q>, there would be a single exception from the English pronunciation of the syllable <q>ear</q>, and he thought it better not to have that exception.</p>
			<p>He praised Grainger’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Ode on Solitude</i>, in Dodsley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collection</i>, and repeated, with great energy, the exordium:⁠—</p>
			<p>“O Solitude, romantic maid,<br/>
			Whether by nodding towers you tread;<br/>
			Or haunt the desart’s trackless gloom,<br/>
			Or hover o’er the yawning tomb;<br/>
			Or climb the Andes’ clifted side,<br/>
			Or by the Nile’s coy source abide;<br/>
			Or, starting from your half-year’s sleep,<br/>
			From Hecla view the thawing deep;<br/>
			Or, at the purple dawn of day,<br/>
			Tadnor’s marble waste survey<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3420" id="noteref-3420" epub:type="noteref">3420</a>”;</p>
			<p>observing, “This, Sir, is very noble.”</p>
			<p>In the evening our gentleman-farmer, and two others, entertained themselves and the company with a great number of tunes on the fiddle. Johnson desired to have “Let ambition fire thy mind,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3421" id="noteref-3421" epub:type="noteref">3421</a>” played over again, and appeared to give a patient attention to it; though he owned to me that he was very insensible to the power of music.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3422" id="noteref-3422" epub:type="noteref">3422</a> I told him, that it affected me to such a degree, as often to agitate my nerves painfully, producing in my mind alternate sensations of pathetic dejection, so that I was ready to shed tears; and of daring resolution, so that I was inclined to rush into the thickest part of the battle. “Sir, (said he,) I should never hear it, if it made me such a fool.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-198">Much of the effect of music, I am satisfied, is owing to the association of ideas. That air, which instantly and irresistibly excites in the Swiss, when in a foreign land, the <i xml:lang="fr">maladie du pais</i>, has, I am told, no intrinsic power of sound. And I know from my own experience, that Scotch reels, though brisk, make me melancholy, because I used to hear them in my early years, at a time when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pitt called for soldiers “from the mountains of the north,” and numbers of brave Highlanders were going abroad, never to return.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3423" id="noteref-3423" epub:type="noteref">3423</a> Whereas the airs in <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">The Beggar’s Opera</i>, many of which are very soft, never fail to render me gay, because they are associated with the warm sensations and high spirits of London. This evening, while some of the tunes of ordinary composition were played with no great skill, my frame was agitated, and I was conscious of a generous attachment to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, as my preceptor and friend, mixed with an affectionate regret that he was an old man, whom I should probably lose in a short time. I thought I could defend him at the point of my sword. My reverence and affection for him were in full glow. I said to him, “My dear Sir, we must meet every year, if you don’t quarrel with me.” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, you are more likely to quarrel with me, than I with you. My regard for you is greater almost than I have words to express; but I do not choose to be always repeating it; write it down in the first leaf of your pocketbook, and never doubt of it again.”</p>
			<p>I talked to him of misery being “the doom of man” in this life, as displayed in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Vanity of Human Wishes</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3424" id="noteref-3424" epub:type="noteref">3424</a>’. Yet I observed that things were done upon the supposition of happiness; grand houses were built, fine gardens were made, splendid places of public amusement were contrived, <a id="III-page-199" />and crowded with company. JOHNSON. “Alas, Sir, these are all only struggles for happiness. When I first entered Ranelagh,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3425" id="noteref-3425" epub:type="noteref">3425</a> it gave an expansion and gay sensation to my mind, such as I never experienced anywhere else. But, as Xerxes wept when he viewed his immense army, and considered that not one of that great multitude would be alive a hundred years afterwards, so it went to my heart to consider that there was not one in all that brilliant circle, that was not afraid to go home and think; but that the thoughts of each individual there, would be distressing when alone.” This reflection was experimentally just. The feeling of languor,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3426" id="noteref-3426" epub:type="noteref">3426</a> which succeeds the animation of gaiety, is itself a very severe pain; and when the mind is then vacant, a thousand disappointments and vexations rush in and excruciate. Will not many even of my fairest readers allow this to be true?</p>
			<p>I suggested, that being in love, and flattered with hopes of success; or having some favourite scheme in view for the next day, might prevent that wretchedness of which we had been talking. JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, it may sometimes be so as you suppose; but my conclusion is in general but too true.”</p>
			<p>While Johnson and I stood in calm conference by ourselves in <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor’s garden, at a pretty late hour in a serene autumn night, looking up to the heavens, I directed the discourse to the subject of a future state. My friend was in a placid and most benignant frame. “Sir, (said he,) I do not imagine that all things will be made clear to us immediately after death, but that the ways of Providence will be explained <a id="III-page-200" />to us very gradually.” I ventured to ask him whether, although the words of some texts of Scripture seemed strong in support of the dreadful doctrine of an eternity of punishment, we might not hope that the denunciation was figurative, and would not literally be executed. JOHNSON. “Sir, you are to consider the intention of punishment in a future state. We have no reason to be sure that we shall then be no longer liable to offend against GOD. We do not know that even the angels are quite in a state of security; nay we know that some of them have fallen. It may, therefore, perhaps be necessary, in order to preserve both men and angels in a state of rectitude, that they should have continually before them the punishment of those who have deviated from it; but we may hope that by some other means a fall from rectitude may be prevented. Some of the texts of Scripture upon this subject are, as you observe, indeed strong; but they may admit of a mitigated interpretation.” He talked to me upon this awful and delicate question in a gentle tone, and as if afraid to be decisive.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3427" id="noteref-3427" epub:type="noteref">3427</a></p>
			<p>After supper I accompanied him to his apartment, and at my request he dictated to me an argument in favour of the negro who was then claiming his liberty, in an action in the Court of Session in Scotland.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3428" id="noteref-3428" epub:type="noteref">3428</a> He had always been very zealous against slavery in every form, in which I, with all deference, thought that he discovered “a zeal without knowledge.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3429" id="noteref-3429" epub:type="noteref">3429</a>” Upon one occasion, when in company with some very grave men at Oxford, his toast was, “Here’s to the next insurrection of the negroes in the West Indies.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3430" id="noteref-3430" epub:type="noteref">3430</a>” His violent prejudice against our West Indian and American settlers appeared whenever there was an opportunity.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3431" id="noteref-3431" epub:type="noteref">3431</a> Towards <a id="III-page-201" />the conclusion of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Taxation no Tyranny</i>, he says, “how is it that we hear the loudest <em>yelps</em> for liberty among the drivers of negroes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3432" id="noteref-3432" epub:type="noteref">3432</a>?” and in his conversation with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes, he asked, “Where did Beckford and Trecothick learn English<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3433" id="noteref-3433" epub:type="noteref">3433</a>?” That Trecothick could both speak and write good English is well known. I myself was favoured with his correspondence concerning the brave Corsicans. And that Beckford could speak it with a spirit of honest resolution even to his Majesty, as his “faithful Lord-Mayor of London,” is commemorated by the noble monument erected to him in Guildhall.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3434" id="noteref-3434" epub:type="noteref">3434</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-202">The argument dictated by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson was as follows:⁠—</p>
			<p>“It must be agreed that in most ages many countries have had part of their inhabitants in a state of slavery;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3435" id="noteref-3435" epub:type="noteref">3435</a> yet it may be doubted whether slavery can ever be supposed the natural condition of man. It is impossible not to conceive that men in their original state were equal;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3436" id="noteref-3436" epub:type="noteref">3436</a> and very difficult to imagine how one would be subjected to another but by violent compulsion. An individual may, indeed, forfeit his liberty by a crime; but he cannot by that crime forfeit the liberty of his children.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3437" id="noteref-3437" epub:type="noteref">3437</a> What is true of a criminal seems true likewise of a captive. A man may accept life from a conquering enemy on condition of perpetual servitude; but it is very doubtful whether he can entail that servitude on his descendants; for no man can stipulate without commission for another. The condition which he himself accepts, his son or grandson perhaps would have rejected. If we should admit, what perhaps may with more reason be denied, that there are certain relations between man and man which may make slavery necessary and just, yet it can never be proved that he who is now suing for his freedom ever stood in any of those relations. He is certainly subject by no law, but that of violence, to his present master; who pretends no claim to his obedience, but that he bought him from a merchant of slaves, whose right to sell him never was examined. It is said that, according to the constitutions of Jamaica, he was legally enslaved; these constitutions are merely positive; and apparently injurious to the rights of mankind, because whoever is <a id="III-page-203" />exposed to sale is condemned to slavery without appeal; by whatever fraud or violence he might have been originally brought into the merchant’s power. In our own time Princes have been sold, by wretches to whose care they were entrusted, that they might have a European education; but when once they were brought to a market in the plantations, little would avail either their dignity or their wrongs. The laws of Jamaica afford a Negro no redress. His colour is considered as a sufficient testimony against him. It is to be lamented that moral right should ever give way to political convenience. But if temptations of interest are sometimes too strong for human virtue, let us at least retain a virtue where there is no temptation to quit it. In the present case there is apparent right on one side, and no convenience on the other. Inhabitants of this island can neither gain riches nor power by taking away the liberty of any part of the human species. The sum of the argument is this:⁠—No man is by nature the property of another: The defendant is, therefore, by nature free: The rights of nature must be some way forfeited before they can be justly taken away: That the defendant has by any act forfeited the rights of nature we require to be proved; and if no proof of such forfeiture can be given, we doubt not but the justice of the court will declare him free.”</p>
			<p>I record <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s argument fairly upon this particular case; where, perhaps, he was in the right. But I beg leave to enter my most solemn protest against his general doctrine with respect to the <i>Slave Trade</i>. For I will resolutely say⁠—that his unfavourable notion of it was owing to prejudice, and imperfect or false information. The wild and dangerous attempt which has for some time been persisted in to obtain an act of our Legislature, to abolish so very important and necessary a branch of commercial interest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3438" id="noteref-3438" epub:type="noteref">3438</a> must have been crushed at once, had not the insignificance of the zealots who vainly took the lead in it, made the vast body of Planters, <a id="III-page-204" />Merchants, and others, whose immense properties are involved in that trade, reasonably enough suppose that there could be no danger. The encouragement which the attempt has received excites my wonder and indignation: and though some men of superior abilities have supported it; whether from a love of temporary popularity, when prosperous; or a love of general mischief, when desperate, my opinion is unshaken. To abolish a <em>status</em>, which in all ages GOD has sanctioned, and man has continued, would not only be <em>robbery</em> to an innumerable class of our fellow-subjects; but it would be extreme cruelty to the African Savages, a portion of whom it saves from massacre, or intolerable bondage in their own country, and introduces into a much happier state of life; especially now when their passage to the West-Indies and their treatment there is humanely regulated. To abolish that trade would be to</p>
			<p>“⁠—shut the gates of mercy on mankind<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3439" id="noteref-3439" epub:type="noteref">3439</a>’.</p>
			<p>Whatever may have passed elsewhere concerning it, the HOUSE OF LORDS is wise and independent:</p>
			<p><i xml:lang="la">Intaminatis fulget honoribus; Nec sumit aut ponit secures Arbitrio popularis aurae</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3440" id="noteref-3440" epub:type="noteref">3440</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-205">I have read, conversed, and thought much upon the subject, and would recommend to all who are capable of conviction, an excellent Tract by my learned and ingenious friend John Ranby, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Doubts on the Abolition of the Slave Trade</i>. To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ranby’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Doubts</i> I will apply Lord Chancellor Hardwicke’s expression in praise of a Scotch Law Book, called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dirleton’s Doubts</i>; HIS <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Doubts</i>, (said his Lordship,) are better than most people’s <em>Certainties</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3441" id="noteref-3441" epub:type="noteref">3441</a></p>
			<p>When I said now to Johnson, that I was afraid I kept him too late up.<br/>
			“No, Sir, (said he,) I don’t care though I sit all night with you.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3442" id="noteref-3442" epub:type="noteref">3442</a>”<br/>
			This was an animated speech from a man in his sixty-ninth year.</p>
			<p>Had I been as attentive not to displease him as I ought to have been, I know not but this vigil might have been fulfilled; but I unluckily entered upon the controversy concerning the right of Great-Britain to tax America, and attempted to argue in favour of our fellow-subjects on the other side of the Atlantic.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3443" id="noteref-3443" epub:type="noteref">3443</a> I insisted that America might be very well governed, and made to yield sufficient revenue by the means of <em>influence</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3444" id="noteref-3444" epub:type="noteref">3444</a> as exemplified in Ireland, while the people might be pleased with the imagination of their participating of the British constitution, by having a body of representatives, without whose consent money could not be exacted from them. Johnson could not <a id="III-page-206" />bear my thus opposing his avowed opinion, which he had exerted himself with an extreme degree of heat to enforce; and the violent agitation into which he was thrown, while answering, or rather reprimanding me, alarmed me so, that I heartily repented of my having unthinkingly introduced the subject. I myself, however, grew warm, and the change was great, from the calm state of philosophical discussion in which we had a little before been pleasingly employed.</p>
			<p>I talked of the corruption of the British Parliament, in which I alleged that any question, however unreasonable or unjust, might be carried by a venal majority; and I spoke with high admiration of the Roman Senate, as if composed of men sincerely desirous to resolve what they should think best for their country.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3445" id="noteref-3445" epub:type="noteref">3445</a> My friend would allow no such character to the Roman Senate; and he maintained that the British Parliament was not corrupt, and that there was no occasion to corrupt its members; asserting, that there was hardly ever any question of great importance before Parliament, any question in which a man might not very well vote either upon one side or the other. He said there had been none in his time except that respecting America.</p>
			<p id="III-page-207">We were fatigued by the contest, which was produced by my want of caution; and he was not then in the humour to slide into easy and cheerful talk. It therefore so happened, that we were after an hour or two very willing to separate and go to bed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3446" id="noteref-3446" epub:type="noteref">3446</a></p>
			<p>On Wednesday, September 24, I went into <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s room before he got up, and finding that the storm of the preceding night was quite laid, I sat down upon his bedside, and he talked with as much readiness and good-humour as ever. He recommended to me to plant a considerable part of a large moorish farm which I had purchased,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3447" id="noteref-3447" epub:type="noteref">3447</a> and he made several calculations of the expense and profit: for he delighted in exercising his mind on the science of numbers.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3448" id="noteref-3448" epub:type="noteref">3448</a> He pressed upon me the importance of planting at the first in a very sufficient manner, quoting the saying “<i xml:lang="la">In bello non licet bis errare</i>:” and adding, “this is equally true in planting.”</p>
			<p>I spoke with gratitude of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor’s hospitality; and, as evidence that it was not on account of his good table alone that Johnson visited him often, I mentioned a little anecdote which had escaped my friend’s recollection, and at hearing which repeated, he smiled. One evening, when I was sitting with him, Frank delivered this message: “Sir, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor sends his compliments to you, and begs you will dine with him tomorrow. He has got a hare.”⁠—“My compliments (said Johnson) and I’ll dine with him⁠—hare or rabbit.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-208">After breakfast I departed, and pursued my journey northwards.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3449" id="noteref-3449" epub:type="noteref">3449</a> I took my post-chaise from the Green Man, a very good inn at Ashbourne, the mistress of which, a mighty civil gentlewoman, courtseying very low, presented me with an engraving of the sign of her house; to which she had subjoined, in her own handwriting, an address in such singular simplicity of style, that I have preserved it pasted upon one of the boards of my original Journal at this time, and shall here insert it for the amusement of my readers:⁠—</p>
			<p>“M. KILLINGLEY’s duty waits upon Mr. Boswell, is exceedingly obliged to him for this favour; whenever he comes this way, hopes for a continuance of the same. Would Mr. Boswell _name the house to his extensive acquaintance, it would be a singular favour conferr’d on one who has it not in her power to make any other return but her most grateful thanks, and sincerest prayers for his happiness in time, and in a blessed eternity.</p>
			<p>“Tuesday morn.”</p>
			<p>From this meeting at Ashbourne I derived a considerable accession to my Johnsonian store. I communicated my original Journal to Sir William Forbes, in whom I have always placed deserved confidence; and what he wrote to me concerning it is so much to my credit as the biographer of Johnson, that my readers will, I hope, grant me their indulgence for here inserting it<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3450" id="noteref-3450" epub:type="noteref">3450</a>: “It is not once or twice going over it (says Sir William,) that will satisfy me; for I find in it a high degree of instruction as well as entertainment; and I derive more benefit from <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s admirable discussions than I should be able to draw from his personal conversation; for, I suppose there is not a man in the world to whom he discloses his sentiments so freely as to yourself.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-209">I cannot omit a curious circumstance which occurred at Edensor-inn, close by Chatsworth, to survey the magnificence of which I had gone a considerable way out of my road to Scotland. The inn was then kept by a very jolly landlord, whose name, I think, was Malton. He happened to mention that “the celebrated <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson had been in his house.” I inquired <em>who</em> this <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson was, that I might hear mine host’s notion of him. “Sir, (said he,) Johnson, the great writer; <em>Oddity</em>, as they call him. He’s the greatest writer in England; he writes for the ministry; he has a correspondence abroad, and lets them know what’s going on.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3451" id="noteref-3451" epub:type="noteref">3451</a>”</p>
			<p>My friend, who had a thorough dependance upon the authenticity of my relation without any <em>embellishment</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3452" id="noteref-3452" epub:type="noteref">3452</a> as <em>falsehood</em> or <em>fiction</em> is too gently called, laughed a good deal at this representation of himself.</p>
			<p>“MR. BOSWELL TO DR. JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 29, 1777.</p>
			<p>“MY DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“By the first post I inform you of my safe arrival at my own house, and that I had the comfort of finding my wife and children all in good health.</p>
			<p>“When I look back upon our late interview, it appears to me to have answered expectation better than almost any scheme of happiness that I ever put in execution. My Journal is stored with wisdom and wit;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3453" id="noteref-3453" epub:type="noteref">3453</a> and my memory is filled with the recollection of lively and affectionate feelings, which now, I think, yield me more satisfaction than at the time when they were first excited. I have experienced this upon other occasions. I shall be obliged to you if you will explain it to me; for it seems wonderful that pleasure should be more vivid at a distance than when near. I wish you may find yourself in a humour to do me this favour; but I flatter myself with no strong hope of it; for I have observed, that unless upon very serious occasions, your letters to me are not answers to those which I write.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3454" id="noteref-3454" epub:type="noteref">3454</a>”</p>
			<p>[I then expressed much uneasiness that I had mentioned to him the name of the gentleman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3455" id="noteref-3455" epub:type="noteref">3455</a> who had told me the story <a id="III-page-210" />so much to his disadvantage, the truth of which he had completely refuted; for that my having done so might be interpreted as a breach of confidence, and offend one whose society I valued:⁠—therefore earnestly requesting that no notice might be taken of it to anybody, till I should be in London, and have an opportunity to talk it over with the gentleman.]</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“You will wonder, or you have wondered, why no letter has come from me. What you wrote at your return, had in it such a strain of cowardly caution as gave me no pleasure. I could not well do what you wished; I had no need to vex you with a refusal. I have seen <abbr>Mr.</abbr> ⸺,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3456" id="noteref-3456" epub:type="noteref">3456</a> and as to him have set all right, without any inconvenience, so far as I know, to you. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale had forgot the story. You may now be at ease.</p>
			<p>“And at ease I certainly wish you, for the kindness that you showed in coming so long a journey to see me. It was pity to keep you so long in pain, but, upon reviewing the matter, I do not see what I could have done better than as I did.</p>
			<p>“I hope you found at your return my dear enemy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3457" id="noteref-3457" epub:type="noteref">3457</a> and all her little people quite well, and had no reason to repent of your journey. I think on it with great gratitude.</p>
			<p>“I was not well when you left me at the Doctor’s, and I grew worse; yet I stayed on, and at Lichfield was very ill. Travelling, however, did not make me worse; and when I came to London, I complied with a summons to go to Brighthelmston, where I saw Beauclerk, and stayed three days.</p>
			<p>“Our CLUB has recommenced last Friday, but I was not there. Langton has another wench.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3458" id="noteref-3458" epub:type="noteref">3458</a> <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale is in hopes of a young brewer.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3459" id="noteref-3459" epub:type="noteref">3459</a> They got by their trade last year a very large sum,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3460" id="noteref-3460" epub:type="noteref">3460</a> and their expenses are proportionate.</p>
			<p id="III-page-211">“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams’s health is very bad. And I have had for some time a very difficult and laborious respiration; but I am better by purges, abstinence, and other methods. I am yet, however, much behind hand in my health and rest.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Blair’s Sermons are now universally commended; but let him think that I had the honour of first finding and first praising his excellencies. I did not stay to add my voice to that of the public.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3461" id="noteref-3461" epub:type="noteref">3461</a></p>
			<p>“My dear friend, let me thank you once more for your visit; you did me great honour, and I hope met with nothing that displeased you. I stayed long at Ashbourne, not much pleased, yet awkward at departing. I then went to Lichfield, where I found my friend at Stow-hill<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3462" id="noteref-3462" epub:type="noteref">3462</a> very dangerously diseased. Such is life. Let us try to pass it well, whatever it be, for there is surely something beyond it.</p>
			<p>“Well, now I hope all is well, write as soon as you can to, dear Sir,<br/>
			“Your affectionate servant,<br/>
			“SAM. JOHNSON.”<br/>
			“London, <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 25, 1777.”</p>
			<p>“To DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.<br/>
			“Edinburgh, <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 29, 1777.</p>
			<p>“My DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“This day’s post has at length relieved me from much uneasiness, by bringing me a letter from you. I was, indeed, doubly uneasy;⁠—on my own account and yours. I was very anxious to be secured against any bad consequences from my imprudence in mentioning the gentleman’s name who had told me a story to your disadvantage; and as I could hardly suppose it possible, that you would delay so long to make me easy, unless you were ill, I was not a little apprehensive about you. You must not be offended when I venture to tell you that you appear to me to have been too rigid upon this occasion. The ‘<q>cowardly caution which gave you no pleasure</q>,’ was suggested to me by a friend here, to whom I mentioned the strange story and the detection of its falsity, as an instance how one may be deceived by what is apparently very good authority. But, as I am still persuaded, that as I might have obtained the truth, without mentioning the gentleman’s name, it was wrong in me to do it, I cannot see that you are just in blaming my caution. But if you were ever so just in your disapprobation, might you not have dealt more tenderly with me?</p>
			<p id="III-page-212">“I went to Auchinleck about the middle of October, and passed some time with my father very comfortably.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“I am engaged in a criminal prosecution against a country schoolmaster, for indecent behaviour to his female scholars. There is no statute against such abominable conduct; but it is punishable at common law. I shall be obliged to you for your assistance in this extraordinary trial. I ever am, my dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your faithful humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p>About this time I wrote to Johnson, giving him an account of the decision of the <i epub:type="se:name.legal-case">Negro cause</i>, by the court of Session, which by those who hold even the mildest and best regulated slavery in abomination, (of which number I do not hesitate to declare that I am none,) should be remembered with high respect, and to the credit of Scotland; for it went upon a much broader ground than the case of <i epub:type="se:name.legal-case">Somerset</i>, which was decided in England;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3463" id="noteref-3463" epub:type="noteref">3463</a> being truly the general question, whether a perpetual obligation of service to one master in any mode should be sanctified by the law of a free country. A negro, then called <i>Joseph Knight</i>, a native of Africa, who having been brought to Jamaica in the usual course of the slave trade, and purchased by a Scotch gentleman in that island, had attended his master to Scotland, where it was officiously suggested to him that he would be found entitled to his liberty without any limitation. He accordingly brought his action, in the course of which the advocates on both sides did themselves great honour. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Maclaurin has had the praise of Johnson, for his argument<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3464" id="noteref-3464" epub:type="noteref">3464</a> in <a id="III-page-213" />favour of the negro, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Macconochie distinguished himself on the same side, by his ingenuity and extraordinary research. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cullen, on the part of the master, discovered good information and sound reasoning; in which he was well supported by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> James Ferguson, remarkable for a manly understanding, and a knowledge both of books and of the world. But I cannot too highly praise the speech which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Henry Dundas generously contributed to the cause of the sooty stranger. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dundas’s Scottish accent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3465" id="noteref-3465" epub:type="noteref">3465</a> which has been so often in vain obtruded as an objection to his powerful abilities in parliament, was no disadvantage to him in his own country. And I do declare, that upon this memorable question he impressed me, and I believe all his audience, with such feelings as were produced by some of the most eminent orations of antiquity. This testimony I liberally give to the excellence of an old friend, with whom it has been my lot to differ very widely upon many political topics; yet I persuade myself without malice. A great majority of the Lords of Session decided for the negro. But four of their number, the Lord President, Lord Elliock, Lord Monboddo, and Lord Covington, resolutely maintained the lawfulness of a status, which has been acknowledged in all ages <a id="III-page-214" />and countries, and that when freedom flourished, as in old Greece and Rome.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3466" id="noteref-3466" epub:type="noteref">3466</a></p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“This is the time of the year in which all express their good wishes to their friends, and I send mine to you and your family. May your lives be long, happy, and good. I have been much out of order, but, I hope, do not grow worse.</p>
			<p>“The crime of the schoolmaster whom you are engaged to prosecute is very great, and may be suspected to be too common. In our law it would be a breach of the peace, and a misdemeanour: that is, a kind of indefinite crime, not capital, but punishable at the discretion of the Court. You cannot want matter: all that needs to be said will easily occur.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shaw,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3467" id="noteref-3467" epub:type="noteref">3467</a> the author of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Gaelic Grammar</i>, desires me to make a request for him to Lord Eglintoune, that he may be appointed Chaplain to one of the new-raised regiments.</p>
			<p>“All our friends are as they were; little has happened to them of either good or bad. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale ran a great black hairdressing pin into her eye; but by great evacuation she kept it from inflaming, and <a id="III-page-215" />it is almost well. Miss Reynolds has been out of order, but is better. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams is in a very poor state of health.</p>
			<p>“If I should write on, I should, perhaps, write only complaints, and therefore I will content myself with telling you, that I love to think on you, and to hear from you; and that I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Yours faithfully,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“December 27, 1777.”</p>
			<p>“To DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 8, 1778.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“Your congratulations upon a new year are mixed with complaint: mine must be so too. My wife has for some time been very ill, having been confined to the house these three months by a severe cold, attended with alarming symptoms.</p>
			<p>[Here I gave a particular account of the distress which the person, upon every account most dear to me, suffered; and of the dismal state of apprehension in which I now was: adding that I never stood more in need of his consoling philosophy.]</p>
			<p>“Did you ever look at a book written by Wilson, a Scotchman, under the Latin name of <i>Volusenus</i>, according to the custom of literary men at a certain period. It is entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Animi Tranquillitate</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3468" id="noteref-3468" epub:type="noteref">3468</a> I earnestly desire tranquillity. <i xml:lang="la">Bona res quies</i>: but I fear I shall never attain it: for, when unoccupied, I grow gloomy, and occupation agitates me to feverishness.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most affectionate humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“To a letter so interesting as your last, it is proper to return some answer, however little I may be disposed to write.</p>
			<p>“Your alarm at your lady’s illness was reasonable, and not disproportionate to the appearance of the disorder. I hope your physical friend’s conjecture is now verified, and all fear of a consumption at an end: a little care and exercise will then restore her. London is a good air for <a id="III-page-216" />ladies; and if you bring her hither, I will do for her what she did for me⁠—I will retire from my apartments, for her accommodation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3469" id="noteref-3469" epub:type="noteref">3469</a> Behave kindly to her, and keep her cheerful.</p>
			<p>“You always seem to call for tenderness. Know then, that in the first month of the present year I very highly esteem and very cordially love you. I hope to tell you this at the beginning of every year as long as we live; and why should we trouble ourselves to tell or hear it oftener?</p>
			<p>“Tell Veronica, Euphemia, and Alexander, that I wish them, as well as their parents, many happy years.</p>
			<p>“You have ended the negro’s cause much to my mind. Lord Auchinleck and dear Lord Hailes were on the side of liberty. Lord Hailes’s name reproaches me; but if he saw my languid neglect of my own affairs, he would rather pity than resent my neglect of his. I hope to mend, <i xml:lang="la">ut et mihi vivam et amicis</i>.</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your’s affectionately,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“January 24, 1778.”</p>
			<p>“My service to my fellow-traveller, Joseph.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3470" id="noteref-3470" epub:type="noteref">3470</a>”</p>
			<p>Johnson maintained a long and intimate friendship with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Welch,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3471" id="noteref-3471" epub:type="noteref">3471</a> who succeeded the celebrated Henry Fielding as one of his Majesty’s Justices of the Peace for Westminster; kept a regular office for the police<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3472" id="noteref-3472" epub:type="noteref">3472</a> of that great district; and discharged his important trust, for many years, faithfully and ably. Johnson, who had an eager and unceasing curiosity to know human life in all its variety, told me, that he attended <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Welch in his office for a whole winter, to hear the examinations of the culprits; but that he found an almost uniform tenor of misfortune, wretchedness and profligacy. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Welch’s health being impaired, he was advised to try the effect of a warm climate; and Johnson, <a id="III-page-217" />by his interest with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chamier,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3473" id="noteref-3473" epub:type="noteref">3473</a> procured him leave of absence to go to Italy, and a promise that the pension or salary of two hundred pounds a year, which Government allowed him,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3474" id="noteref-3474" epub:type="noteref">3474</a> should not be discontinued. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Welch accordingly went abroad, accompanied by his daughter Anne, a young lady of uncommon talents and literature.</p>
			<h3>“TO SAUNDERS WELCH, ESQ., AT THE ENGLISH COFFEEHOUSE, ROME.</h3>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“To have suffered one of my best and dearest friends to pass almost two years in foreign countries without a letter, has a very shameful appearance of inattention. But the truth is, that there was no particular time in which I had anything particular to say; and general expressions of good will, I hope, our long friendship is grown too solid to want.</p>
			<p>“Of public affairs you have information from the newspapers wherever you go, for the English keep no secret; and of other things, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Nollekens informs you. My intelligence could therefore be of no use; and Miss Nancy’s letters made it unnecessary to write to you for information: I was likewise for some time out of humour, to find that motion, and nearer approaches to the sun, did not restore your health so fast as I expected. Of your health, the accounts have lately been more pleasing; and I have the gratification of imaging to myself a length of years which I hope you have gained, and of which the enjoyment will be improved by a vast accession of images and observations which your journeys and various residence have enabled you to make and accumulate. You have travelled with this felicity, almost peculiar to yourself, that your companion is not to part from you at your journey’s end; but you are to live on together, to help each other’s recollection, and to supply each other’s omissions. The world has few greater pleasures than that which two friends enjoy, in tracing back, at some distant time, those transactions and events through which they have passed together. One of the old man’s miseries is, that he cannot easily find a companion able to partake with him of the past. You and your fellow-traveller have this comfort in store, that your conversation will be not easily exhausted; one will always be glad to say what the other will always be willing to hear.</p>
			<p id="III-page-218">“That you may enjoy this pleasure long, your health must have your constant attention. I suppose you purpose to return this year. There is no need of haste: do not come hither before the height of summer, that you may fall gradually into the inconveniences of your native clime. July seems to be the proper month. August and September will prepare you for the winter. After having travelled so far to find health, you must take care not to lose it at home; and I hope a little care will effectually preserve it.</p>
			<p>“Miss Nancy has doubtless kept a constant and copious journal. She must not expect to be welcome when she returns, without a great mass of information. Let her review her journal often, and set down what she finds herself to have omitted, that she may trust to memory as little as possible, for memory is soon confused by a quick succession of things; and she will grow every day less confident of the truth of her own narratives, unless she can recur to some written memorials. If she has satisfied herself with hints, instead of full representations, let her supply the deficiencies now while her memory is yet fresh, and while her father’s memory may help her. If she observes this direction, she will not have travelled in vain; for she will bring home a book with which she may entertain herself to the end of life. If it were not now too late, I would advise her to note the impression which the first sight of anything new and wonderful made upon her mind. Let her now set her thoughts down as she can recollect them; for faint as they may already be, they will grow every day fainter.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps I do not flatter myself unreasonably when I imagine that you may wish to know something of me. I can gratify your benevolence with no account of health. The hand of time, or of disease, is very heavy upon me. I pass restless and uneasy nights, harassed with convulsions of my breast, and flatulencies at my stomach; and restless nights make heavy days. But nothing will be mended by complaints, and therefore I will make an end. When we meet, we will try to forget our cares and our maladies, and contribute, as we can, to the chearfulness of each other. If I had gone with you, I believe I should have been better; but I do not know that it was in my power.</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM, JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Feb.</abbr> 3, 1778.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-219">This letter, while it gives admirable advice how to travel to the best advantage, and will therefore be of very general use, is another eminent proof of Johnson’s warm and affectionate heart.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3475" id="noteref-3475" epub:type="noteref">3475</a></p>
			<h3>“TO DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.</h3>
			<p>“Edinburgh, <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 26, 1778.</p>
			<p>“MY DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“Why I have delayed, for near a month, to thank you for your last affectionate letter, I cannot say; for my mind has been in better health these three weeks than for some years past. I believe I have evaded till I could send you a copy of Lord Hailes’s opinion on the negro’s cause, which he wishes you to read, and correct any errors that there may be in the language; for, says he, ‘we live in a critical, though not a learned age; and I seek to screen myself under the shield of Ajax.’ I communicated to him your apology for keeping the sheets of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annals</i> so long. He says, ‘I am sorry to see that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson is in a state of languor. Why should a sober Christian, neither an enthusiast nor a fanatic, be very merry or very sad?’ I envy his Lordship’s comfortable constitution: but well do I know that languor and dejection will afflict the best, however excellent their principles. I am in possession of Lord Hailes’s opinion in his own handwriting, and have had it for some time. My excuse then for procrastination must be, that I wanted to have it copied; and I have now put that off so long, that it will be better to bring it with me than send it, as I shall probably get you to look at it sooner, when I solicit you in person.</p>
			<p>“My wife, who is, I thank GOD, a good deal better, is much obliged to you for your very polite and courteous offer of your apartment: but, if she goes to London, it will be best for her to have lodgings in the more airy vicinity of Hyde-Park. I, however, doubt much if I shall be able to prevail with her to accompany me to the metropolis; for she is so different from you and me, that she dislikes travelling; and she is so anxious about her children, that she thinks she should be unhappy if at a distance from them. She therefore wishes rather to go to some country place in Scotland, where she can have them with her.</p>
			<p>“I purpose being in London about the 20th of next month, as I think it creditable to appear in the House of Lords as one of Douglas’s Counsel, in the great and last competition between Duke Hamilton and him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3476" id="noteref-3476" epub:type="noteref">3476</a></p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p id="III-page-220">“I am sorry poor <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams is so ill: though her temper is unpleasant, she has always been polite and obliging to me. I wish many happy years to good <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Levett, who I suppose holds his usual place at your breakfast table.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3477" id="noteref-3477" epub:type="noteref">3477</a></p>
			<p>“I ever am, my dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your affectionate humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p>TO THE SAME.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 28, 1778.</p>
			<p>“MY DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“You are at present busy amongst the English poets, preparing, for the public instruction and entertainment, Prefaces, biographical and critical. It will not, therefore, be out of season to appeal to you for the decision of a controversy which has arisen between a lady and me concerning a passage in Parnell. That poet tells us, that his Hermit quitted his cell</p>
			<p>‘… to know the world by sight,<br/>
			To find if <em>books</em> or <em>swains</em> report it right;<br/>
			(For yet by <em>swains alone</em> the world he knew,<br/>
			Whose feet came wand’ring o’er the nightly dew.)’</p>
			<p>I maintain, that there is an inconsistency here; for as the Hermit’s notions of the world were formed from the reports both of <q>books</q> and <q>swains</q>, he could not justly be said to know by <q>swains alone</q>. Be pleased to judge between us, and let us have your reasons.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3478" id="noteref-3478" epub:type="noteref">3478</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-221">“What do you say to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Taxation no Tyranny</i>, now, after Lord North’s declaration, or confession, or whatever else his conciliatory speech should be called<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3479" id="noteref-3479" epub:type="noteref">3479</a>? I never differed from you in politics but upon two points⁠—the Middlesex Election,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3480" id="noteref-3480" epub:type="noteref">3480</a> and the Taxation of the Americans by the <em>British Houses of Representatives</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3481" id="noteref-3481" epub:type="noteref">3481</a> There is a _charm _in the word <q>Parliament</q>, so I avoid it. As I am a steady and a warm Tory, I regret that the King does not see it to be better for him to receive constitutional supplies from his American subjects by the voice of their own assemblies, where his Royal Person is represented, than through the medium of his British subjects. I am persuaded that the power of the Crown, which I wish to increase, would be greater when in contact with all its dominions, than if ‘the rays of regal bounty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3482" id="noteref-3482" epub:type="noteref">3482</a>’ were to ‘shine’ upon America through that dense and troubled body, a modern British Parliament. But, enough of this subject; for your angry voice at Ashbourne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3483" id="noteref-3483" epub:type="noteref">3483</a> upon it, still sounds aweful ‘in my mind’s <em>ears</em>.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3484" id="noteref-3484" epub:type="noteref">3484</a></p>
			<p>“I ever am, my dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most affectionate humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p>TO THE SAME.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, March 12, 1778.</p>
			<p>“MY DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“The alarm of your late illness distressed me but a few hours; for on the evening of the day that it reached me, I found it contradicted in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The London Chronicle</i>, which I could depend upon as authentic concerning you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan being the printer of it. I did not see the paper in which ‘the approaching extinction of a bright luminary’ was announced. Sir William Forbes told me of it; and he says, he saw me so uneasy, that he did not give me the report in such strong terms as he read it. He afterwards sent me a letter from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton to him, which relieved me much. I am, however, not quite easy, as I have not heard from you; and now I shall not have that comfort before I see you, for I set out for London tomorrow before the post comes in. I hope to be with you on Wednesday morning; and I ever am, with the highest veneration, my dear Sir, your much obliged, faithful, and affectionate,</p>
			<p id="III-page-222">“Humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p>On Wednesday, March 18, I arrived in London, and was informed by good <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Francis that his master was better, and was gone to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale’s at Streatham, to which place I wrote to him, begging to know when he would be in town. He was not expected for some time; but next day having called on <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor, in Dean’s-yard, Westminster, I found him there, and was told he had come to town for a few hours. He met me with his usual kindness, but instantly returned to the writing of something on which he was employed when I came in, and on which he seemed much intent. Finding him thus engaged, I made my visit very short, and had no more of his conversation, except his expressing a serious regret that a friend of ours<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3485" id="noteref-3485" epub:type="noteref">3485</a> was living at too much expense, considering how poor an appearance he made: “If (said he) a man has splendour from his expense, if he spends his money in pride or in pleasure, he has value: but if he lets others spend it for him, which is most commonly the case, he has no advantage from it.”</p>
			<p>On Friday, March 20, I found him at his own house, sitting with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams, and was informed that the room formerly allotted to me<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3486" id="noteref-3486" epub:type="noteref">3486</a> was now appropriated to a charitable purpose; <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Desmoulins,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3487" id="noteref-3487" epub:type="noteref">3487</a> and I think her daughter, and a Miss Carmichael, being all lodged in it. Such was his humanity, and such his generosity, that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Desmoulins herself told me, he allowed her half-a-guinea a week. Let it be remembered, that this was above a twelfth part of his pension.</p>
			<p>His liberality, indeed, was at all periods of his life very remarkable. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Howard, of Lichfield, at whose father’s house Johnson had in his early years been kindly received, told me, that when he was a boy at the Charter-House, his father wrote to him to go and pay a visit to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Samuel Johnson, which <a id="III-page-223" />he accordingly did, and found him in an upper room, of poor appearance. Johnson received him with much courteousness, and talked a great deal to him, as to a schoolboy, of the course of his education, and other particulars. When he afterwards came to know and understand the high character of this great man, he recollected his condescension with wonder. He added, that when he was going away, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Johnson presented him with half-a-guinea; and this, said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Howard, was at a time when he probably had not another.</p>
			<p>We retired from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams to another room. Tom Davies soon after joined us. He had now unfortunately failed in his circumstances, and was much indebted to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s kindness for obtaining for him many alleviations of his distress.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3488" id="noteref-3488" epub:type="noteref">3488</a> After he went away, Johnson blamed his folly in quitting the stage, by which he and his wife got five hundred pounds a year. I said, I believed it was owing to Churchill’s attack upon him,</p>
			<p>“He mouths a sentence, as curs mouth a bone.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3489" id="noteref-3489" epub:type="noteref">3489</a>”</p>
			<p>JOHNSON. “I believe so too, Sir. But what a man is he, who is to be driven from the stage by a line? Another line would have driven him from his shop.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-224">I told him, that I was engaged as Counsel at the bar of the House of Commons to oppose a road-bill in the county of Stirling, and asked him what mode he would advise me to follow in addressing such an audience. JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, you must provide yourself with a good deal of extraneous matter, which you are to produce occasionally, so as to fill up the time; for you must consider, that they do not listen much. If you begin with the strength of your cause, it may be lost before they begin to listen. When you catch a moment of attention, press the merits of the question upon them.” He said, as to one point of the merits, that he thought “it would be a wrong thing to deprive the small landholders of the privilege of assessing themselves for making and repairing the high roads; <em>it was destroying a certain portion of liberty, without a good reason, which was always a bad thing</em>! When I mentioned this observation next day to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes, he pleasantly said, “What! does <em>he</em> talk of liberty? <em>Liberty</em> is as ridiculous in <em>his</em> mouth as <em>Religion</em> in <em>mine</em>!” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes’s advice, as to the best mode of speaking at the bar of the House of Commons, was not more respectful towards the senate, than that of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson. “Be as impudent as you can, as merry as you can, and say whatever comes uppermost. Jack Lee<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3490" id="noteref-3490" epub:type="noteref">3490</a> is the best heard there of any Counsel; and he is the most impudent dog, and always abusing us.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-225">In my interview with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson this evening, I was quite easy, quite as his companion; upon which I find in my Journal the following reflection: “So ready is my mind to suggest matter for dissatisfaction, that I felt a sort of regret that I was so easy. I missed that aweful reverence with which I used to contemplate MR. SAMUEL JOHNSON, in the complex magnitude of his literary, moral, and religious character. I have a wonderful superstitious love of <em>mystery</em>; when, perhaps, the truth is, that it is owing to the cloudy darkness of my own mind. I should be glad that I am more advanced in my progress of being, so that I can view <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson with a steadier and clearer eye. My dissatisfaction tonight was foolish. Would it not be foolish to regret that we shall have less mystery in a future state? That we ‘now see in<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3491" id="noteref-3491" epub:type="noteref">3491</a> a glass darkly,’ but shall ‘then see face to face?’ ” This reflection, which I thus freely communicate, will be valued by the thinking part of my readers, who may have themselves experienced a similar state of mind.</p>
			<p>He returned next day to Streatham, to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale’s; where, as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan once complained to me, “he was in a great measure absorbed from the society of his old friends.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3492" id="noteref-3492" epub:type="noteref">3492</a>” I was kept in London by business, and wrote to him on the 27th, that a separation from him for a week, when we were so near, was equal to a separation for a year, when we were at four hundred miles distance. I went to Streatham on Monday, March 30. Before he appeared, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale made a very characteristical remark:⁠—“I do not know for certain what will please <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson: but I know for certain that it will displease him to praise anything, even what he likes, extravagantly.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3493" id="noteref-3493" epub:type="noteref">3493</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-226">At dinner he laughed at querulous declamations against the age, on account of luxury<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3494" id="noteref-3494" epub:type="noteref">3494</a>⁠—increase of London⁠—scarcity of provisions⁠—and other such topics. “Houses (said he) will be built till rents fall: and corn is more plentiful now than ever it was.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3495" id="noteref-3495" epub:type="noteref">3495</a>”</p>
			<p>I had before dinner repeated a ridiculous story told me by an old man who had been a passenger with me in the stagecoach today. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale, having taken occasion to allude to it in talking to me, called it “The story told you by the old <em>woman</em>.”⁠—“Now, Madam, (said I,) give me leave to catch you in the fact; it was not an old <em>woman</em>, but an old <em>man</em>, whom I mentioned as having told me this.” I presumed to take an opportunity, in presence of Johnson, of showing this lively lady how ready she was, unintentionally, to deviate from exact authenticity of narration.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3496" id="noteref-3496" epub:type="noteref">3496</a></p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Thomas à Kempis</i> (he observed) must be a good book, as the world has opened its arms to receive it. It is said to have been printed, in one language or other, as many times as there have been months since it first came out.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3497" id="noteref-3497" epub:type="noteref">3497</a> I always was struck with this sentence in it: “Be not angry that you <a id="III-page-227" />cannot make others as you wish them to be, since you cannot make yourself as you wish to be.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3498" id="noteref-3498" epub:type="noteref">3498</a>”</p>
			<p>He said, “I was angry with Hurd about Cowley, for having published a selection of his works: but, upon better consideration, I think there is no impropriety in a man’s publishing as much as he chooses of any author, if he does not put the rest out of the way. A man, for instance, may print the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Odes</i> of Horace alone.” He seemed to be in a more indulgent humour, than when this subject was discussed between him and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murphy.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3499" id="noteref-3499" epub:type="noteref">3499</a></p>
			<p>When we were at tea and coffee, there came in Lord Trimlestown, in whose family was an ancient Irish peerage, but it suffered by taking the generous side in the troubles of the last century.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3500" id="noteref-3500" epub:type="noteref">3500</a> He was a man of pleasing conversation, and was accompanied by a young gentleman, his son.</p>
			<p>I mentioned that I had in my possession the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Sir Robert Sibbald</i>, the celebrated Scottish antiquary, and founder of the Royal College of Physicians at Edinburgh, in the original manuscript in his own handwriting; and that it was I believed the most natural and candid account of himself that ever was given by any man. As an instance, he tells that the Duke of Perth, then Chancellor of Scotland, pressed him very much to come over to the Roman Catholic faith: that he resisted all his Grace’s arguments for a considerable time, till one day he felt himself, as it were, instantaneously convinced, and with tears in his eyes ran into the Duke’s arms, and embraced the ancient religion; that he continued very steady in it for some time, and accompanied his Grace to London one winter, and lived in his household; that there he found the rigid fasting prescribed by the church very severe upon him; that this disposed him to reconsider the controversy, and having then seen that he was in the wrong, he returned to Protestantism. I talked of some time or other publishing <a id="III-page-228" />this curious life. MRS. THRALE. “I think you had as well let alone that publication. To discover such weakness, exposes a man when he is gone.” JOHNSON. “Nay, it is an honest picture of human nature. How often are the primary motives of our greatest actions as small as Sibbald’s, for his re-conversion.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3501" id="noteref-3501" epub:type="noteref">3501</a>” MRS. THRALE. “But may they not as well be forgotten?” JOHNSON. “No, Madam, a man loves to review his own mind. That is the use of a diary, or journal.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3502" id="noteref-3502" epub:type="noteref">3502</a>” LORD TRIMLESTOWN. “True, Sir. As the ladies love to see themselves in a glass; so a man likes to see himself in his journal.” BOSWELL. “A very pretty allusion.” JOHNSON. “Yes, indeed.” BOSWELL. “And as a lady adjusts her dress before a mirror, a man adjusts his character by looking at his journal.” I next year found the very same thought in Atterbury’s <i>Funeral Sermon on Lady Cutts</i>; where, having mentioned her <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, he says, “In this glass she every day dressed her mind.” This is a proof of coincidence, and not of plagiarism; for I had never read that sermon before.</p>
			<p>Next morning, while we were at breakfast, Johnson gave a very earnest recommendation of what he himself practised with the utmost conscientiousness: I mean a strict attention to truth, even in the most minute particulars. “Accustom your children (said he) constantly to this; if a thing happened at one window, and they, when relating it, say that it happened at another, do not let it pass, but instantly check them; you do not know where deviation from truth will end.” BOSWELL. “It may come to the door: and when once an account is at all varied in one circumstance, it may by degrees be varied so as to be totally different from what really happened.” Our lively hostess, whose fancy was impatient of the rein, fidgeted at this, and ventured to say, “Nay, this is too much. If <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Johnson should forbid me to drink tea, I would comply, as I should feel the restraint only twice a day; but little variations in narrative must happen a thousand times a day, if one is not perpetually watching.” JOHNSON. “Well, Madam, and you <em>ought</em> to be perpetually watching. It is more from carelessness about truth than from <a id="III-page-229" />intentional lying, that there is so much falsehood in the world.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3503" id="noteref-3503" epub:type="noteref">3503</a>”</p>
			<p>In his review of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Warton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essay on the Writings and Genius of Pope</i>, Johnson has given the following salutary caution upon this subject:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Nothing but experience could evince the frequency of false information, or enable any man to conceive that so many groundless reports should be propagated, as every man of eminence may hear of himself. Some men relate what they think, as what they know; some men of confused memories and habitual inaccuracy, ascribe to one man what belongs to another; and some talk on, without thought or care. A few men are sufficient to broach falsehoods, which are afterwards innocently diffused by successive relaters.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3504" id="noteref-3504" epub:type="noteref">3504</a>”</p>
			<p>Had he lived to read what Sir John Hawkins and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Piozzi have related concerning himself, how much would he have found his observation illustrated. He was indeed so much impressed with the prevalence of falsehood, voluntary or unintentional, that I never knew any person who upon hearing an extraordinary circumstance told, discovered more of the <i xml:lang="la">incredulus odi</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3505" id="noteref-3505" epub:type="noteref">3505</a> He would say, with a significant look and decisive tone, “It is not so. Do not tell this again.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3506" id="noteref-3506" epub:type="noteref">3506</a>” He inculcated upon all his friends <a id="III-page-230" />the importance of perpetual vigilance against the slightest degrees of falsehood; the effect of which, as Sir Joshua Reynolds observed to me, has been, that all who were of his <em>school</em> are distinguished for a love of truth and accuracy, which they would not have possessed in the same degree, if they had not been acquainted with Johnson.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3507" id="noteref-3507" epub:type="noteref">3507</a></p>
			<p>Talking of ghosts, he said, “It is wonderful that five thousand years have now elapsed since the creation of the world, and still it is undecided whether or not there has ever been an instance of the spirit of any person appearing after death. All argument is against it; but all belief is for it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3508" id="noteref-3508" epub:type="noteref">3508</a>”</p>
			<p>He said, “John Wesley’s conversation is good,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3509" id="noteref-3509" epub:type="noteref">3509</a> but he is never at leisure. He is always obliged to go at a certain hour.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3510" id="noteref-3510" epub:type="noteref">3510</a> This is very disagreeable to a man who loves to fold his legs and have out his talk, as I do.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-231">On Friday, April 3, I dined with him in London, in a company<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3511" id="noteref-3511" epub:type="noteref">3511</a> where were present several eminent men, whom I shall not name, but distinguish their parts in the conversation by different letters.</p>
			<p>F. “I have been looking at this famous antique marble dog of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jennings, valued at a thousand guineas, said to be Alcibiades’s dog.” JOHNSON. “His tail then must be docked. That was the mark of Alcibiades’s dog.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3512" id="noteref-3512" epub:type="noteref">3512</a>” E. “A thousand guineas! The representation of no animal whatever is worth so much, at this rate a dead dog would indeed be better than a living lion.” JOHNSON. “Sir, it is not the worth of the thing, but of the skill in forming it which is so highly estimated. Everything that enlarges the sphere of human powers, that shows man he can do what he thought he could not do, is valuable. The first man who balanced a straw upon his nose;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3513" id="noteref-3513" epub:type="noteref">3513</a> Johnson, who rode upon three horses at a time;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3514" id="noteref-3514" epub:type="noteref">3514</a> in short, all such men deserved the applause of mankind, not on account of the use of what they did, but of the dexterity which they exhibited.” BOSWELL. “Yet a misapplication of time and assiduity is not to be encouraged. Addison, in one of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Spectators</i>, commends the judgement of a King, who, as a suitable reward to a man that by long perseverance had attained to the art of throwing a barleycorn through the eye of a needle, gave him a bushel of barley.” JOHNSON. “He must have been a King of Scotland, where barley is scarce.” F. “One of the most remarkable antique figures of an animal is the boar at Florence.” JOHNSON. “The first boar that is well made in marble, should be preserved as a wonder. When men arrive at a facility of making boars well, then the workmanship is not of such value, but they should however be preserved as examples, and as a greater security for the restoration of the art, should it be lost.”</p>
			<p>E. “We hear prodigious<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3515" id="noteref-3515" epub:type="noteref">3515</a> complaints at present of emigration.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3516" id="noteref-3516" epub:type="noteref">3516</a> <a id="III-page-232" />I am convinced that emigration makes a country more populous.” J. “That sounds very much like a paradox.” E. “Exportation of men, like exportation of all other commodities, makes more be produced.” JOHNSON. “But there would be more people were there not emigration, provided there were food for more.” E. “No; leave a few breeders, and you’ll have more people than if there were no emigration.” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, it is plain there will be more people, if there are more breeders. Thirty cows in good pasture will produce more calves than ten cows, provided they have good bulls.” E. “There are bulls enough in Ireland.” JOHNSON. (smiling,) “So, Sir, I should think from your argument.” BOSWELL. “You said, exportation of men, like exportation of other commodities, makes more be produced. But a bounty is given to encourage the exportation of corn,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3517" id="noteref-3517" epub:type="noteref">3517</a> and no bounty is given for the exportation of men; though, indeed, those who go, gain by it.” R. “But the bounty on the exportation of corn is paid at home.” E. “That’s the same thing.” JOHNSON. “No, Sir.” R. “A man who stays at home, gains nothing by his neighbours emigrating.” BOSWELL. “I can understand that emigration may be the cause that more people may be produced in a country; but the country will not therefore be the more populous; for the people issue from it. It can only be said that there is a flow of people. It is an encouragement to have children, to know that they can get a living by emigration.” R. “Yes, if there were an emigration of children under six years of age. But they don’t emigrate till they could earn their livelihood in some way at home.” C. “It is remarkable that the most unhealthy countries, where there are the most destructive <a id="III-page-233" />diseases, such as Egypt and Bengal, are the most populous.” JOHNSON. “Countries which are the most populous have the most destructive diseases. <em>That</em> is the true state of the proposition.” C. “Holland is very unhealthy, yet it is exceedingly populous.” JOHNSON. “I know not that Holland is unhealthy. But its populousness is owing to an influx of people from all other countries. Disease cannot be the cause of populousness, for it not only carries off a great proportion of the people, but those who are left are weakened and unfit for the purposes of increase.”</p>
			<p>R. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> E., I don’t mean to flatter, but when posterity reads one of your speeches in Parliament, it will be difficult to believe that you took so much pains, knowing with certainty that it could produce no effect, that not one vote would be gained by it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3518" id="noteref-3518" epub:type="noteref">3518</a>” E. “Waiving your compliment to me, I shall say in general, that it is very well worth while for a man to take pains to speak well in Parliament. A man, who has vanity, speaks to display his talents; and if a man speaks well, he gradually establishes a certain reputation and consequence in the general opinion, which sooner or later will have its political reward. Besides, though not one vote is gained, a good speech has its effect. Though an act which has been ably opposed passes into a law, yet in its progress it is modelled, it is softened in such a manner, that we see plainly the Minister has been told, that the Members attached to him are so sensible of its injustice or absurdity from what they have heard, that it must be altered.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3519" id="noteref-3519" epub:type="noteref">3519</a>” <a id="III-page-234" />JOHNSON. “And, Sir, there is a gratification of pride. Though we cannot outvote them we will out-argue them. They shall not do wrong without its being shown both to themselves and to the world.” E. “The House of Commons is a mixed body. (I except the Minority, which I hold to be pure, [smiling] but I take the whole House.) It is a mass by no means pure; but neither is it wholly corrupt, though there is a large proportion of corruption in it. There are many members who generally go with the Minister, who will not go all lengths. There are many honest well-meaning country gentleman who are in parliament only to keep up the consequence of their families. Upon most of these a good speech will have influence.” JOHNSON. “We are all more or less governed by interest. But interest will not make us do everything. In a case which admits of doubt, we try to think on the side which is for our interest, and generally bring ourselves to act accordingly. But the subject must admit of diversity of colouring; it must receive a colour on that side. In the House of Commons there are members enough who will not vote what is grossly unjust or absurd. No, Sir, there must always be right enough, or appearance of right, to keep wrong in countenance.” BOSWELL. “There is surely always a majority in parliament who have places, or who want to have them, and who therefore will be generally ready to support government without requiring any pretext.” E. “True, Sir; that majority will always follow</p>
			<p>‘<i xml:lang="la">Quo clamor vocat et turba, faventium.</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3520" id="noteref-3520" epub:type="noteref">3520</a>’ ”</p>
			<p>BOSWELL. “Well now, let us take the common phrase, Place-hunters. I thought they had hunted without regard to anything, just as their huntsmen, the Minister, leads, looking only to the prey.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3521" id="noteref-3521" epub:type="noteref">3521</a>” J. “But taking your metaphor, you know that in hunting there are few so desperately keen as to follow without reserve. Some do not choose to leap ditches and hedges and risk their necks, or gallop over steeps, or even to dirty themselves <a id="III-page-235" />in bogs and mire.” BOSWELL. “I am glad there are some good, quiet, moderate political hunters.” E. “I believe, in anybody of men in England, I should have been in the Minority; I have always been in the Minority.” P. “The House of Commons resembles a private company. How seldom is any man convinced by another’s argument; passion and pride rise against it.” R. “What would be the consequence, if a Minister, sure of a majority in the House of Commons, should resolve that there should be no speaking at all upon his side.” E. “He must soon go out. That has been tried; but it was found it would not do.”</p>
			<p>E. “The Irish language is not primitive; it is Teutonic, a mixture of the northern tongues: it has much English in it.” JOHNSON. “It may have been radically Teutonic; but English and High Dutch have no similarity to the eye, though radically the same. Once, when looking into Low Dutch, I found, in a whole page, only one word similar to English; <q>stroem</q>, like <q>stream</q>, and it signified <q>tide</q>“. E. “I remember having seen a Dutch Sonnet, in which I found this word, <q>roesnopies</q>. Nobody would at first think that this could be English; but, when we enquire, we find <q>roes</q>, rose, and <q>nopie</q>, knob; so we have <q>rosebuds</q>“.</p>
			<p>JOHNSON. “I have been reading Thicknesse’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels</i>, which I think are entertaining.” BOSWELL. “What, Sir, a good book?” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir, to read once; I do not say you are to make a study of it, and digest it; and I believe it to be a true book in his intention. All travellers generally mean to tell truth; though Thicknesse observes, upon Smollet’s account of his alarming a whole town in France by firing a blunderbuss,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3522" id="noteref-3522" epub:type="noteref">3522</a> and frightening a French nobleman till he made him tie on his portmanteau,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3523" id="noteref-3523" epub:type="noteref">3523</a> that he would be loth <a id="III-page-236" />to say Smollet had told two lies in one page; but he had found the only town in France where these things could have happened.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3524" id="noteref-3524" epub:type="noteref">3524</a> Travellers must often be mistaken. In everything, except where mensuration can be applied, they may honestly differ. There has been, of late, a strange turn in travellers to be displeased.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3525" id="noteref-3525" epub:type="noteref">3525</a>”</p>
			<p>E. “From the experience which I have had⁠—and I have had a great deal⁠—I have learnt to think <em>better</em> of mankind.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3526" id="noteref-3526" epub:type="noteref">3526</a>” JOHNSON. “From my experience I have found them worse in commercial dealings, more disposed to cheat, than I had any notion of; but more disposed to do one another good than I had conceived.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3527" id="noteref-3527" epub:type="noteref">3527</a>” J. “Less just and more beneficent.” JOHNSON. “And really it is wonderful, considering how much attention is necessary for men to take care of themselves, and ward off immediate evils which press upon them, it is wonderful how much they do for others. As it is said of the greatest liar, that he tells more truth than falsehood; so it may be said of the worst man, that he does more good <a id="III-page-237" />than evil.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3528" id="noteref-3528" epub:type="noteref">3528</a>” BOSWELL. “Perhaps from experience men may be found happier than we suppose.” JOHNSON. “No, Sir; the more we enquire, we shall find men the less happy.” P. “As to thinking better or worse of mankind from experience, some cunning people will not be satisfied unless they have put men to the test, as they think. There is a very good story told of Sir Godfrey Kneller, in his character of a Justice of the peace. A gentleman brought his servant before him, upon an accusation of having stolen some money from him; but it having come out that he had laid it purposely in the servant’s way, in order to try his honesty, Sir Godfrey sent the master to prison.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3529" id="noteref-3529" epub:type="noteref">3529</a>” JOHNSON. “To resist temptation once, is not a sufficient proof of honesty. If a servant, indeed, were to resist the continued temptation of silver lying in a window, as some people let it lye, when he is sure his master does not know how much there is of it, he would give a strong proof of honesty. But this is a proof to which you have no right to put a man. You know, humanly speaking, there is a certain degree of temptation, which will overcome any virtue. Now, in so far as you approach temptation to a man, you do him an injury; and, if he is overcome, you share his guilt.” P. “And, when once overcome, it is easier for him to be got the better of again.” BOSWELL. “Yes, you are his seducer; you have debauched him. I have known a man<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3530" id="noteref-3530" epub:type="noteref">3530</a> resolved to <a id="III-page-238" />put friendship to the test, by asking a friend to lend him money merely with that view, when he did not want it.” JOHNSON. “That is very wrong, Sir. Your friend may be a narrow man, and yet have many good qualities: narrowness may be his only fault. Now you are trying his general character as a friend, by one particular singly, in which he happens to be defective, when, in truth, his character is composed of many particulars.”</p>
			<p>E. “I understand the hogshead of claret, which this society was favoured with by our friend the Dean,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3531" id="noteref-3531" epub:type="noteref">3531</a> is nearly out; I think he should be written to, to send another of the same kind. Let the request be made with a happy ambiguity of expression, so that we may have the chance of his sending <em>it</em> also as a present.” JOHNSON. “I am willing to offer my services as secretary on this occasion.” P. “As many as are for <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson being secretary hold up your hands.⁠—Carried unanimously.” BOSWELL. “He will be our Dictator.” JOHNSON. “No, the company is to dictate to me. I am only to write for wine; and I am quite disinterested, as I drink none; I shall not be suspected of having forged the application. I am no more than humble <em>scribe</em>.” E. “Then you shall <em>pre</em>scribe.” BOSWELL. “Very well. The first play of words today.” J. “No, no; the <em>bulls</em> in Ireland.” JOHNSON. “Were I your Dictator you should have no wine. It would be my business <i xml:lang="la">cavere ne quid detrimenti Respublica caperet</i>, and wine is dangerous. Rome was ruined by luxury,” (smiling.) E. “If you allow no wine as Dictator, you shall not have me for your master of horse.”</p>
			<p>On Saturday, April 4, I drank tea with Johnson at <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Taylor’s, where he had dined. He entertained us with an account of a tragedy written by a <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Kennedy, (not the Lisbon physician.) “The catastrophe of it (said he) was, that a King, who was jealous of his Queen with his prime-minister, castrated himself.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3532" id="noteref-3532" epub:type="noteref">3532</a> This tragedy was actually shown about in manuscript to several people, and, amongst others, to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fitzherbert, who repeated to me two lines of the Prologue:</p>
			<p id="III-page-239">‘Our hero’s fate we have but gently touch’d;<br/>
			The fair might blame us, if it were less couch’d.’</p>
			<p>It is hardly to be believed what absurd and indecent images men will introduce into their writings, without being sensible of the absurdity and indecency. I remember Lord Orrery told me, that there was a pamphlet written against Sir Robert Walpole, the whole of which was an allegory on the PHALLICK OBSCENITY. The Duchess of Buckingham asked Lord Orrery <em>who</em> this person was? He answered he did not know. She said, she would send to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pulteney, who, she supposed, could inform her. So then, to prevent her from making herself ridiculous, Lord Orrery sent her Grace a note, in which he gave her to understand what was meant.”</p>
			<p>He was very silent this evening; and read in a variety of books: suddenly throwing down one, and taking up another.</p>
			<p>He talked of going to Streatham that night. TAYLOR. “You’ll be robbed if you do: or you must shoot a highwayman.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3533" id="noteref-3533" epub:type="noteref">3533</a> Now I would rather be robbed than do that; I would not shoot a highwayman.” JOHNSON. “But I would rather shoot him in the instant when he is attempting to rob me, than afterwards swear against him at the Old-Bailey, to take away his life, after he has robbed me.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3534" id="noteref-3534" epub:type="noteref">3534</a> I am surer I am right in the one case than in the other. I may be mistaken as to the man, when I swear: I cannot be mistaken, if I shoot him in the act. Besides, we feel less <a id="III-page-240" />reluctance reluctance to take away a man’s life, when we are heated by the injury, than to do it at a distance of time by an oath, after we have cooled.” BOSWELL. “So, Sir, you would rather act from the motive of private passion, than that of public advantage.” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, when I shoot the highwayman I act from both.” BOSWELL. “Very well, very well.⁠—There is no catching him.” JOHNSON. “At the same time one does not know what to say. For perhaps one may, a year after, hang himself from uneasiness for having shot a man.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3535" id="noteref-3535" epub:type="noteref">3535</a> Few minds are fit to be trusted with so great a thing.” BOSWELL. “Then, Sir, you would not shoot him?” JOHNSON. “But I might be vexed afterwards for that too.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3536" id="noteref-3536" epub:type="noteref">3536</a>”</p>
			<p>Thrale’s carriage not having come for him, as he expected, I accompanied him some part of the way home to his own house. I told him, that I had talked of him to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dunning<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3537" id="noteref-3537" epub:type="noteref">3537</a> a few days before, and had said, that in his company we did not so much interchange conversation, as listen to him; and that Dunning observed, upon this, “One is always willing to listen to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson:” to which I answered, “That is a great deal from you, Sir.”⁠—“Yes, Sir, (said Johnson,) a great deal indeed. Here is a man willing to listen, to whom the world is listening all the rest of the year.” BOSWELL. “I think, Sir, it is right to tell one man of such a handsome thing, which has been said of him by <a id="III-page-241" />another. It tends to increase benevolence.” JOHNSON. “Undoubtedly it is right, Sir.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3538" id="noteref-3538" epub:type="noteref">3538</a>”</p>
			<p>On Tuesday, April 7, I breakfasted with him at his house. He said, “nobody was content.” I mentioned to him a respectable person<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3539" id="noteref-3539" epub:type="noteref">3539</a> in Scotland whom he knew; and I asserted, that I really believed he was always content. JOHNSON. “No, Sir, he is not content with the present; he has always some new scheme, some new plantation, something which is future. You know he was not content as a widower; for he married again.” BOSWELL. “But he is not restless.” JOHNSON. “Sir, he is only locally at rest. A chymist is locally at rest; but his mind is hard at work. This gentleman has done with external exertions. It is too late for him to engage in distant projects.” BOSWELL. “He seems to amuse himself quite well; to have his attention fixed, and his tranquillity preserved by very small matters. I have tried this; but it would not do with me.” JOHNSON, (laughing) “No, Sir; it must be born with a man to be contented to take up with <a id="III-page-242" />little things. Women have a great advantage that they may take up with little things, without disgracing themselves: a man cannot, except with fiddling. Had I learnt to fiddle, I should have done nothing else.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3540" id="noteref-3540" epub:type="noteref">3540</a>” BOSWELL. “Pray, Sir, did you ever play on any musical instrument?” JOHNSON. “No, Sir. I once bought me a flagelet; but I never made out a tune.” BOSWELL. “A flagelet, Sir!⁠—so small an instrument<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3541" id="noteref-3541" epub:type="noteref">3541</a>? I should have liked to hear you play on the violoncello. <em>That</em> should have been <em>your</em> instrument.” JOHNSON. “Sir, I might as well have played on the violoncello as another; but I should have done nothing else. No, Sir; a man would never undertake great things, could he be amused with small. I once tried knotting. Dempster’s sister undertook to teach me; but I could not learn it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3542" id="noteref-3542" epub:type="noteref">3542</a>” BOSWELL. “So, Sir; it will be related in pompous narrative, ‘Once for his amusement he tried knotting; nor did this Hercules disdain the distaff.’ ” JOHNSON. “Knitting of stockings is a good amusement. As a freeman of Aberdeen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3543" id="noteref-3543" epub:type="noteref">3543</a> I should be a knitter of stockings.” He asked me to go down with him and dine at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale’s at Streatham, to which I agreed. I had lent him <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">An Account of Scotland, in 1702</i>, written by a man of various enquiry, an English chaplain to a regiment stationed there. <a id="III-page-243" />JOHNSON. “It is sad stuff, Sir, miserably written, as books in general then were. There is now an elegance of style universally diffused.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3544" id="noteref-3544" epub:type="noteref">3544</a> No man now writes so ill as Martin’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Account of the Hebrides</i> is written. A man could not write so ill, if he should try. Set a merchant’s clerk now to write, and he’ll do better.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3545" id="noteref-3545" epub:type="noteref">3545</a>”</p>
			<p>He talked to me with serious concern of a certain female friend’s “laxity of narration, and inattention to truth.”⁠—“I am as much vexed (said he) at the ease with which she hears it mentioned to her, as at the thing itself. I told her, ‘Madam, you are contented to hear every day said to you, what the highest of mankind have died for, rather than bear.’⁠—You know, Sir, the highest of mankind have died rather than bear to be told they had uttered a falsehood. Do talk to her of it<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3546" id="noteref-3546" epub:type="noteref">3546</a>: I am weary.”</p>
			<p>BOSWELL. “Was not <abbr>Dr.</abbr> John Campbell a very inaccurate man in his narrative, Sir? He once told me, that he drank thirteen bottles of port at a sitting.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3547" id="noteref-3547" epub:type="noteref">3547</a> <a id="III-page-244" />JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, I do not know that Campbell ever lied with pen and ink; but you could not entirely depend on anything he told you in conversation: if there was fact mixed with it. However, I loved Campbell: he was a solid orthodox man: he had a reverence for religion. Though defective in practice, he was religious in principle; and he did nothing grossly wrong that I have heard.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3548" id="noteref-3548" epub:type="noteref">3548</a>”</p>
			<p>I told him, that I had been present the day before, when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu, the literary lady,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3549" id="noteref-3549" epub:type="noteref">3549</a> sat to Miss Reynolds for her picture; and that she said, “she had bound up <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gibbon’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History</i> without the last two offensive chapters;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3550" id="noteref-3550" epub:type="noteref">3550</a> for that she thought the book so far good, as it gave, in an elegant manner, the substance of the bad writers <i xml:lang="la">medii aevi</i>, which the late Lord Lyttelton advised her to read.” JOHNSON. “Sir, she has not read them: she shows none of this impetuosity to me: she does not know Greek, and, I fancy, knows little Latin. She is willing you should think she knows them; but she does not say she does.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3551" id="noteref-3551" epub:type="noteref">3551</a>” BOSWELL. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harris, who was present, agreed with <a id="III-page-245" />her.” JOHNSON. “Harris was laughing at her, Sir. Harris is a sound sullen scholar; he does not like interlopers. Harris, however, is a prig, and a bad prig.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3552" id="noteref-3552" epub:type="noteref">3552</a> I looked into his book,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3553" id="noteref-3553" epub:type="noteref">3553</a> and thought he did not understand his own system.” BOSWELL. “He says plain things in a formal and abstract way, to be sure: but his method is good: for to have clear notions upon any subject, we must have recourse to analytic arrangement.” JOHNSON. “Sir, it is what everybody does, whether they will or no. But sometimes things may be made darker by definition. I see a <q>cow</q>, I define her, <i xml:lang="la">Animal quadrupes ruminans cornutum</i>. But a goat ruminates, and a cow may have no horns. <q>Cow</q> is plainer.” BOSWELL. “I think <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Franklin’s definition of <q>Man</q> a good one⁠—‘A tool-making animal.’ ” JOHNSON. “But many a man never made a tool; and suppose a man without arms, he could not make a tool.”</p>
			<p>Talking of drinking wine, he said, “I did not leave off wine, because I could not bear it; I have drunk three bottles of port without being the worse for it. University College has witnessed this.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3554" id="noteref-3554" epub:type="noteref">3554</a>” BOSWELL. “Why then, Sir, did you leave it off?” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, because it is so much better for a man to be sure that he is never to be intoxicated, never to lose the power over himself.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3555" id="noteref-3555" epub:type="noteref">3555</a> I shall not begin to drink wine again, till I grow old, and want it.” BOSWELL. “I think, Sir, you once said to me, that not to drink wine was a great deduction from life.” JOHNSON. “It is a diminution of pleasure, to be sure; but I do not say a diminution of happiness. There <a id="III-page-246" />is more happiness in being rational.” BOSWELL. “But if we could have pleasure always, should not we be happy? The greatest part of men would compound for pleasure.” JOHNSON. “Supposing we could have pleasure always, an intellectual man would not compound for it. The greatest part of men would compound, because the greatest part of men are gross.” BOSWELL. “I allow there may be greater pleasure than from wine. I have had more pleasure from your conversation, I have indeed; I assure you I have.” JOHNSON. “When we talk of pleasure, we mean sensual pleasure. When a man says, he had pleasure with a woman, he does not mean conversation, but something of a very different nature. Philosophers tell you, that pleasure is <em>contrary</em> to happiness. Gross men prefer animal pleasure. So there are men who have preferred living among savages. Now what a wretch must he be, who is content with such conversation as can be had among savages! You may remember an officer at Fort Augustus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3556" id="noteref-3556" epub:type="noteref">3556</a> who had served in America, told us of a woman whom they were obliged to <em>bind</em>, in order to get her back from savage life.” BOSWELL. “She must have been an animal, a beast.” JOHNSON. “Sir, she was a speaking cat.”</p>
			<p>I mentioned to him that I had become very weary in a company where I heard not a single intellectual sentence, except that “a man who had been settled ten years in Minorca was become a much inferior man to what he was in London, because a man’s mind grows narrow in a narrow place.” JOHNSON. “A man’s mind grows narrow in a narrow place, whose mind is enlarged only because he has lived in a large place: but what is got by books and thinking is preserved in a narrow place as well as in a large place. A man cannot know modes of life as well in Minorca as in London; but he may study mathematics as well in Minorca.” BOSWELL. “I don’t know, Sir: if you had remained ten years in the Isle of Col, you would not have been the man that you now are.” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir, if I had been there from fifteen to twenty-five; but not if from twenty-five to thirty-five.” BOSWELL. “I own, Sir, the spirits which I have in London <a id="III-page-247" />make me do everything with more readiness and vigour. I can talk twice as much in London as anywhere else.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3557" id="noteref-3557" epub:type="noteref">3557</a>”</p>
			<p>Of Goldsmith he said, “He was not an agreeable companion, for he talked always for fame.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3558" id="noteref-3558" epub:type="noteref">3558</a> A man who does so never can be pleasing. The man who talks to unburden his mind is the man to delight you. An eminent friend<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3559" id="noteref-3559" epub:type="noteref">3559</a> of ours is not so agreeable as the variety of his knowledge would otherwise make him, because he talks partly from ostentation.”</p>
			<p>Soon after our arrival at Thrale’s, I heard one of the maids calling eagerly on another, to go to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson. I wondered what this could mean. I afterwards learnt, that it was to give her a Bible, which he had brought from London as a present to her.</p>
			<p>He was for a considerable time occupied in reading <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Mémoires de Fontenelle</i>, leaning and swinging upon the low gate into the court, without his hat.</p>
			<p>I looked into Lord Kames’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sketches of the History of Man</i>; and mentioned to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson his censure of Charles the Fifth, for celebrating his funeral obsequies in his lifetime, which, I told him, I had been used to think a solemn and affecting act.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3560" id="noteref-3560" epub:type="noteref">3560</a> JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, a man may dispose his mind to think so of that act of Charles; but it is so liable to ridicule, that if one man out of ten thousand laughs at it, he’ll make the other nine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine laugh too.” I could not agree with him in this.</p>
			<p>Sir John Pringle had expressed a wish that I would ask <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s opinion what were the best English sermons for style. I took an opportunity today of mentioning several to him.⁠—<i>Atterbury</i>? JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir, one of the best.” BOSWELL. <i>Tillotson</i>? JOHNSON. “Why, not now. I should not advise a preacher at this day to imitate Tillotson’s style: though I don’t know; I should be cautious of objecting to what <a id="III-page-248" />has been applauded by so many suffrages.⁠—<i>South</i> is one of the best, if you except his peculiarities, and his violence, and sometimes coarseness of language.⁠—<i>Seed</i> has a very fine style; but he is not very theological.⁠—<i>Jortin’s</i> sermons are very elegant.⁠—<i>Sherlock’s</i> style too is very elegant, though he has not made it his principal study.⁠—And you may add <i>Smallridge</i>. All the latter preachers have a good style. Indeed, nobody now talks much of style: everybody composes pretty well.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3561" id="noteref-3561" epub:type="noteref">3561</a> There are no such unharmonious periods as there were a hundred years ago. I should recommend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <i>Clarke’s</i> sermons, were he orthodox.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3562" id="noteref-3562" epub:type="noteref">3562</a> However, it is very well known <em>where</em> he was not orthodox, which was upon the doctrine of the Trinity, as to which he is a condemned heretic; so one is aware of it.” BOSWELL. “I like Ogden’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sermons on Prayer</i> very much, both for neatness of style and subtlety of reasoning.” JOHNSON. “I should like to read all that Ogden has written.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3563" id="noteref-3563" epub:type="noteref">3563</a> BOSWELL. “What I wish to know is, what sermons afford the best specimen of English pulpit eloquence.” JOHNSON. “We have no sermons addressed to the passions that are good for anything; if you mean that kind of eloquence.” A CLERGYMAN: (whose name I do not recollect.) “Were not Dodd’s sermons addressed to the passions?” JOHNSON. “They were nothing, Sir, be they addressed to what they may.”</p>
			<p>At dinner, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale expressed a wish to go and see Scotland. JOHNSON. “Seeing Scotland, Madam, is only seeing a worse England. It is seeing the flower gradually fade away to the naked stalk. Seeing the Hebrides, indeed, is seeing quite a different scene.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-249">Our poor friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas Davies,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3564" id="noteref-3564" epub:type="noteref">3564</a> was soon to have a benefit at Drury-lane theatre, as some relief to his unfortunate circumstances. We were all warmly interested for his success, and had contributed to it. However, we thought there was no harm in having our joke, when he could not be hurt by it. I proposed that he should be brought on to speak a Prologue upon the occasion; and I began to mutter fragments of what it might be: as, that when now grown <em>old</em>, he was obliged to cry, “Poor Tom’s <em>a-cold</em>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3565" id="noteref-3565" epub:type="noteref">3565</a>”⁠—that he owned he had been driven from the stage by a Churchill, but that this was no disgrace, for a Churchill<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3566" id="noteref-3566" epub:type="noteref">3566</a> had beat the French;⁠—that he had been satyrised as “mouthing a sentence as curs mouth a bone,” but he was now glad of a bone to pick.⁠—“Nay, (said Johnson,) I would have him to say,</p>
			<p>‘Mad Tom is come to see the world again.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3567" id="noteref-3567" epub:type="noteref">3567</a>’ ”</p>
			<p>He and I returned to town in the evening. Upon the road, I endeavoured to maintain, in argument, that a landed gentleman is not under any obligation to reside upon his estate; and that by living in London he does no injury to his country. JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, he does no injury to his country in general, because the money which he draws from it gets back again in circulation; but to his particular district, his particular parish, he does an injury. All that he has to give away is not given to those who have the first claim to it. And though I have said that the money circulates back, it is a long time before that happens. Then, Sir, a man of family and estate ought to consider himself as having the charge of a district, over which he is to diffuse civility and happiness.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3568" id="noteref-3568" epub:type="noteref">3568</a>”</p>
			<p>Next day I found him at home in the morning. He praised Delany’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Observations on Swift</i>; said that his book and Lord Orrery’s might both be true, though one viewed Swift more, and the other less favourably; and that, between both, we might have a complete notion of Swift.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3569" id="noteref-3569" epub:type="noteref">3569</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-250">Talking of a man’s resolving to deny himself the use of wine, from moral and religious considerations, he said, “He must not doubt about it. When one doubts as to pleasure, we know what will be the conclusion. I now no more think of drinking wine, than a horse does. The wine upon the table is no more for me, than for the dog that is under the table.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3570" id="noteref-3570" epub:type="noteref">3570</a></p>
			<p>On Thursday, April 9, I dined with him at Sir Joshua Reynolds’s, with the Bishop of <abbr>St.</abbr> Asaph,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3571" id="noteref-3571" epub:type="noteref">3571</a> (<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Shipley,) <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allan Ramsay,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3572" id="noteref-3572" epub:type="noteref">3572</a> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gibbon, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cambridge, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ramsay had lately returned from Italy, and entertained us with his observations upon Horace’s villa, which he had examined with great care. I relished this much, as it brought fresh into my mind what I had viewed with great pleasure thirteen years before. The Bishop, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cambridge, joined with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ramsay, in recollecting the various lines in Horace relating to the subject.</p>
			<p>Horace’s journey to Brundusium being mentioned, Johnson observed, that the brook which he describes is to be seen now, exactly as at that time,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3573" id="noteref-3573" epub:type="noteref">3573</a> and that he had often wondered how it happened, that small brooks, such as this, kept the same situation for ages, notwithstanding earthquakes, by which even mountains have been changed, and agriculture, which produces such a variation upon the surface of the earth. CAMBRIDGE. “A Spanish writer has this thought in a poetical conceit. After observing that most of the solid structures of Rome are totally perished, while the Tiber remains the same, he adds,</p>
			<p id="III-page-251">“<i xml:lang="es">Lo que èra Firme huió solamente, Lo Fugitivo permanece y dura</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3574" id="noteref-3574" epub:type="noteref">3574</a>”</p>
			<p>JOHNSON. “Sir, that is taken from Janus Vitalis:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3575" id="noteref-3575" epub:type="noteref">3575</a></p>
			<p>“… <i xml:lang="la">immota labescunt; Et quae perpetuò sunt agitata manent</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3576" id="noteref-3576" epub:type="noteref">3576</a>”</p>
			<p>The Bishop said, it appeared from Horace’s writings that he was a cheerful contented man. JOHNSON. “We have no reason to believe that, my Lord. Are we to think Pope was happy, because he says so in his writings? We see in his writings what he wished the state of his mind to appear. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Young, who pined for preferment, talks with contempt of it in his writings, and affects to despise everything that he did not despise.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3577" id="noteref-3577" epub:type="noteref">3577</a> BISHOP OF ST. ASAPH. “He was like other chaplains, looking for vacancies: but that is not peculiar to the clergy. I remember when I was with the army,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3578" id="noteref-3578" epub:type="noteref">3578</a> after the battle of Lafeldt, the officers seriously grumbled that no general was killed.” CAMBRIDGE. “We may believe Horace more when he says,</p>
			<p>‘<i xml:lang="la">Romae Tibur amem, ventosus Tibure Romam</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3579" id="noteref-3579" epub:type="noteref">3579</a>’</p>
			<p id="III-page-252">than when he boasts of his consistency:</p>
			<p>‘<i xml:lang="la">Me constare mihi scis, et decedere tristem, Quandocunque trahunt invisa negotia Romam</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3580" id="noteref-3580" epub:type="noteref">3580</a>’ ”</p>
			<p>BOSWELL. “How hard is it that man can never be at rest.” RAMSAY. “It is not in his nature to be at rest. When he is at rest, he is in the worst state that he can be in; for he has nothing to agitate him. He is then like the man in the Irish song,</p>
			<p>‘There liv’d a young man in Ballinacrazy.<br/>
			Who wanted a wife for to make him un_ai_sy.’ ”</p>
			<p>Goldsmith being mentioned, Johnson observed, that it was long before his merit came to be acknowledged. That he once complained to him, in ludicrous terms of distress, “Whenever I write anything, the public <em>make a point</em> to know nothing about it:” but that his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Traveller</i> brought him into high reputation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3581" id="noteref-3581" epub:type="noteref">3581</a> LANGTON. “There is not one bad line in that poem; not one of Dryden’s careless verses.” SIR JOSHUA. “I was glad to hear Charles Fox say, it was one of the finest poems in the English language.” LANGTON. “Why was you glad? You surely had no doubt of this before.” JOHNSON. “No; the merit of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Traveller</i> is so well established, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fox’s praise cannot augment it, nor his censure diminish it.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3582" id="noteref-3582" epub:type="noteref">3582</a> SIR JOSHUA. “But his friends may suspect they had too great a partiality for him.” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, the partiality of his friends was always against him. It was with difficulty we could give him a hearing. Goldsmith had no settled notions upon any subject; so he talked always at random.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3583" id="noteref-3583" epub:type="noteref">3583</a> It seemed to be his intention to blurt out whatever was in his mind, and see what would become of it. He was angry too, when catched in an absurdity; but it did not prevent him from falling into another the next minute. I remember Chamier,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3584" id="noteref-3584" epub:type="noteref">3584</a> after talking with him for some time, said, ‘Well, I do believe he wrote this poem himself: and, let me tell you, that is believing a great deal.’ Chamier once asked him, what he meant by <q>slow</q>, the last word in the first line of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Traveller</i>,</p>
			<p id="III-page-253">“ ‘Remote, unfriended, melancholy, slow.’</p>
			<p>“Did he mean tardiness of locomotion? Goldsmith, who would say something without consideration, answered, ‘Yes.’ I was sitting by, and said, ‘No, Sir; you do not mean tardiness of locomotion; you mean, that sluggishness of mind which comes upon a man in solitude.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3585" id="noteref-3585" epub:type="noteref">3585</a>’ Chamier believed then that I had written the line as much as if he had seen me write it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3586" id="noteref-3586" epub:type="noteref">3586</a> Goldsmith, however, was a man, who, whatever he wrote, did it better than any other man could do. He deserved a place in Westminster-Abbey, and every year he lived, would have deserved it better. He had, indeed, been at no pains to fill his mind with knowledge. He transplanted it from one place to another; and it did not settle in his mind; so he could not tell what was in his own books.”</p>
			<p>We talked of living in the country. JOHNSON. “No wise man will go to live in the country, unless he has something to do which can be better done in the country. For instance: if he is to shut himself up for a year to study a science, it is better to look out to the fields, than to an opposite wall. Then, if a man walks out in the country, there is nobody to keep him from walking in again: but if a man walks out in London, he is not sure when he shall walk in again. A great city is, to be sure, the school for studying life; and ‘The proper study of mankind is man,’ as Pope observes.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3587" id="noteref-3587" epub:type="noteref">3587</a> BOSWELL. “I fancy London is the best place for society; though I have heard that the very first society of Paris is still beyond anything that we have here.” JOHNSON. “Sir, I question if in Paris such a company as is sitting round this table could be got together in less than half a year. They talk in France of the felicity of men and women living together: the truth is, that there the men are not higher than the women, they know no more than the women do, and <a id="III-page-254" />they are not held down in their conversation by the presence of women.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3588" id="noteref-3588" epub:type="noteref">3588</a>” RAMSAY. “Literature is upon the growth, it is in its spring in France. Here it is rather <i xml:lang="fr">passée</i>.” JOHNSON. “Literature was in France long before we had it. Paris was the second city for the revival of letters: Italy had it first, to be sure. What have we done for literature, equal to what was done by the Stephani and others in France? Our literature came to us through France. Caxton printed only two books, Chaucer and Gower, that were not translations from the French; and Chaucer, we know, took much from the Italians. No, Sir, if literature be in its spring in France, it is a second spring; it is after a winter. We are now before the French in literature;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3589" id="noteref-3589" epub:type="noteref">3589</a> but we had it long after them. In England, any man who wears a sword and a powdered wig is ashamed to be illiterate.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3590" id="noteref-3590" epub:type="noteref">3590</a> I believe it is not so in France. Yet there is, probably, a great deal of learning in France, because they have such a number of religious establishments; so many men who have nothing else to do but to study. I do not know this; but I take it upon the common principles of chance. Where there are many shooters, some will hit.”</p>
			<p>We talked of old age.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3591" id="noteref-3591" epub:type="noteref">3591</a> Johnson (now in his seventieth year,) said, “It is a man’s own fault, it is from want of use, if his mind grows torpid in old age.” The Bishop asked, if an old man does not lose faster than he gets. JOHNSON. “I think not, my Lord, if he exerts himself.” One of the company rashly observed, that he thought it was happy for an old man that insensibility comes upon him. JOHNSON: (with a noble elevation and disdain,) <a id="III-page-255" />“No, Sir, I should never be happy by being less rational.” BISHOP OF ST. ASAPH. “Your wish then, Sir, is [Greek: gaeraskein didaskomenos].<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3592" id="noteref-3592" epub:type="noteref">3592</a>” JOHNSON. “Yes, my Lord.”</p>
			<p>His Lordship mentioned a charitable establishment in Wales, where people were maintained, and supplied with everything, upon the condition of their contributing the weekly produce of their labour; and he said, they grew quite torpid for want of property. JOHNSON. “They have no object for hope. Their condition cannot be better. It is rowing without a port.”</p>
			<p>One of the company asked him the meaning of the expression in Juvenal, <i xml:lang="la">unius lacertae</i>. JOHNSON. “I think it clear enough; as much ground as one may have a chance to find a lizard upon.”</p>
			<p>Commentators have differed as to the exact meaning of the expression by which the Poet intended to enforce the sentiment contained in the passage where these words occur. It is enough that they mean to denote even a very small possession, provided it be a man’s own:</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="la">Est aliquid quocunque loco quocunque recessu, Unius sese dominum fecisse lacertae</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3593" id="noteref-3593" epub:type="noteref">3593</a>”</p>
			<p>This season there was a whimsical fashion in the newspapers of applying Shakespeare’s words to describe living persons well known in the world; which was done under the title of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Modern Characters from Shakespeare</i>; many of which were admirably adapted. The fancy took so much, that they were afterwards collected into a pamphlet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3594" id="noteref-3594" epub:type="noteref">3594</a> Somebody said to Johnson, across the table, that he had not been in those characters. “Yes (said he) I have. I should have been sorry to be left out.” He then repeated what had been applied to him,</p>
			<p>“I must borrow GARAGANTUA’S mouth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3595" id="noteref-3595" epub:type="noteref">3595</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-256">Miss Reynolds not perceiving at once the meaning of this, he was obliged to explain it to her, which had something of an awkward and ludicrous effect. “Why, Madam, it has a reference to me, as using big words, which require the mouth of a giant to pronounce them. Garagantua is the name of a giant in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rabelais</i>.” BOSWELL. “But, Sir, there is another amongst them for you:</p>
			<p>‘He would not flatter Neptune for his trident,<br/>
			Or Jove for his power to thunder.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3596" id="noteref-3596" epub:type="noteref">3596</a>’ ”</p>
			<p>JOHNSON. “There is nothing marked in that. No, Sir, Garagantua is the best.” Notwithstanding this ease and good humour, when I, a little while afterwards, repeated his sarcasm on Kenrick,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3597" id="noteref-3597" epub:type="noteref">3597</a> which was received with applause, he asked, “<em>Who</em> said that?” and on my suddenly answering, <q>Garagantua</q>, he looked serious, which was a sufficient indication that he did not wish it to be kept up.</p>
			<p>When we went to the drawing-room there was a rich assemblage. Besides the company who had been at dinner, there were <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Garrick, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harris of Salisbury, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Burney, Honourable <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cholmondeley, Miss Hannah More, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>After wandering about in a kind of pleasing distraction for some time, I got into a corner, with Johnson, Garrick, and Harris. GARRICK: (to Harris.) “Pray, Sir, have you read Potter’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Aeschylus</i>?” HARRIS. “Yes; and think it pretty.” GARRICK. (to Johnson.) “And what think you, Sir, of it?” JOHNSON. “I thought what I read of it <em>verbiage</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3598" id="noteref-3598" epub:type="noteref">3598</a>: but upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harris’s recommendation, I will read a play. (To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harris.) Don’t prescribe two.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harris suggested one, I do not remember which. JOHNSON. “We must try its effect as an English poem; that is the way to judge of the merit of a translation. Translations are, in general, for people who cannot read the original.” I mentioned the vulgar saying,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3599" id="noteref-3599" epub:type="noteref">3599</a> that Pope’s <a id="III-page-257" /><i>Homer</i> was not a good representation of the original. JOHNSON. “Sir, it is the greatest work of the kind that has ever been produced.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3600" id="noteref-3600" epub:type="noteref">3600</a>” BOSWELL. “The truth is, it is impossible perfectly to translate poetry.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3601" id="noteref-3601" epub:type="noteref">3601</a> In a different language it may be the same tune, but it has not the same tone. Homer plays it on a bassoon; Pope on a flagelet.” HARRIS. “I think Heroick poetry is best in blank verse; yet it appears that rhyme is essential to English poetry, from our deficiency in metrical quantities. In my opinion, the chief excellence of our language is numerous prose.” JOHNSON. “Sir William Temple was the first writer who gave cadence to English prose.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3602" id="noteref-3602" epub:type="noteref">3602</a> Before his time they were careless of arrangement, and did not mind whether a sentence ended with an important word or an insignificant word, or with what part of speech it was concluded.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton, who now had joined us, commended Clarendon. JOHNSON. “He is <a id="III-page-258" />objected to for his parentheses, his involved clauses, and his want of harmony. But he is supported by his matter. It is, indeed, owing to a plethory of matter that his style is so faulty.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3603" id="noteref-3603" epub:type="noteref">3603</a> Every <em>substance</em>, (smiling to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harris,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3604" id="noteref-3604" epub:type="noteref">3604</a>) has so many <em>accidents</em>.⁠—To be distinct, we must talk <em>analytically</em>. If we analyse language, we must speak of it grammatically; if we analyse argument, we must speak of it logically.” GARRICK. “Of all the translations that ever were attempted, I think Elphinston’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Martial</i> the most extraordinary.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3605" id="noteref-3605" epub:type="noteref">3605</a> He consulted me upon it, who am a little of an epigrammatist myself, you know. I told him freely, ‘You don’t seem to have that turn.’ I asked him if he was serious; and finding he was, I advised him against publishing. Why, his translation is more difficult to understand than the original. I thought him a man of some talents; but he seems crazy in this.” JOHNSON. “Sir, you have done what I had not courage to do. But he did not ask my advice, and I did not force it upon him, to make him angry with me.” GARRICK. “But as a friend, Sir⁠—” JOHNSON. “Why, such a friend as I am with him⁠—no.” GARRICK. “But if you see a friend going to tumble over a precipice?” JOHNSON. “That is an extravagant case, Sir. You are sure a friend will thank you for hindering him from tumbling over a precipice; but, in the other case, I should hurt his vanity, and do him no good. He would not take my advice. His brother-in-law, Strahan, sent him a subscription of fifty pounds, and said he would send him fifty more, if he would not publish.” GARRICK. “What! Is Strahan a good judge of an Epigram? Is not he rather an <em>obtuse</em> man, <a id="III-page-259" />eh?” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, he may not be a judge of an Epigram: but you see he is a judge of what is <em>not</em> an Epigram.” BOSWELL. “It is easy for you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Garrick, to talk to an author as you talked to Elphinston; you, who have been so long the manager of a theatre, rejecting the plays of poor authors. You are an old Judge, who have often pronounced sentence of death. You are a practiced surgeon, who have often amputated limbs; and though this may have been for the good of your patients, they cannot like you. Those who have undergone a dreadful operation, are not very fond of seeing the operator again.” GARRICK. “Yes, I know enough of that. There was a reverend gentleman, (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawkins,) who wrote a tragedy, the SIEGE of something,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3606" id="noteref-3606" epub:type="noteref">3606</a> which I refused.” HARRIS. “So, the siege was raised.” JOHNSON. “Ay, he came to me and complained; and told me, that Garrick said his play was wrong in the <em>concoction</em>. Now, what is the concoction of a play?” (Here Garrick started, and twisted himself, and seemed sorely vexed; for Johnson told me, he believed the story was true.) GARRICK. “I⁠—I⁠—I⁠—said <em>first</em> concoction.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3607" id="noteref-3607" epub:type="noteref">3607</a>” JOHNSON: (smiling.) “Well, he left out <q>first</q>. And Rich,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3608" id="noteref-3608" epub:type="noteref">3608</a> he said, refused him <em>in false English</em>: he could show it under his hand.” GARRICK. “He wrote to me in violent wrath, for having refused his play: ‘Sir, this is growing a very serious and terrible affair. I am resolved to publish my play. I will <a id="III-page-260" />appeal to the world; and how will your judgement appear?’ I answered, ‘Sir, notwithstanding all the seriousness, and all the terrors, I have no objection to your publishing your play; and as you live at a great distance, (Devonshire, I believe,) if you will send it to me, I will convey it to the press.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3609" id="noteref-3609" epub:type="noteref">3609</a>’ I never heard more of it, ha! ha! ha!”</p>
			<p>On Friday, April 10, I found Johnson at home in the morning. We resumed the conversation of yesterday. He put me in mind of some of it which had escaped my memory, and enabled me to record it more perfectly than I otherwise could have done. He was much pleased with my paying so great attention to his recommendation in 1763, the period when our acquaintance began, that I should keep a journal;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3610" id="noteref-3610" epub:type="noteref">3610</a> and I could perceive he was secretly pleased to find so much of the fruit of his mind preserved; and as he had been used to imagine and say that he always laboured when he said a good thing<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3611" id="noteref-3611" epub:type="noteref">3611</a>⁠—it delighted him, on a review, to find that his conversation teemed with point and imagery.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3612" id="noteref-3612" epub:type="noteref">3612</a></p>
			<p>I said to him, “You were yesterday, Sir, in remarkably good humour<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3613" id="noteref-3613" epub:type="noteref">3613</a>: but there was nothing to offend you, nothing to produce irritation or violence. There was no bold offender. There was not one capital conviction. It was a maiden assize. You had on your white gloves.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-261">He found fault with our friend Langton for having been too silent. “Sir, (said I,) you will recollect, that he very properly took up Sir Joshua for being glad that Charles Fox had praised Goldsmith’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Traveller</i>, and you joined him.” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir, I knocked Fox on the head, without ceremony. Reynolds is too much under Fox and Burke at present. He is under the <em>Fox star</em> and the <em>Irish constellation</em>. He is always under some planet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3614" id="noteref-3614" epub:type="noteref">3614</a>” BOSWELL. “There is no Fox star.” JOHNSON. “But there is a dog star.” BOSWELL. “They say, indeed, a fox and a dog are the same animal.”</p>
			<p>I reminded him of a gentleman, who, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cholmondeley said, was first talkative from affectation, and then silent from the same cause; that he first thought, “I shall be celebrated as the liveliest man in every company;” and then, all at once, “O! it is much more respectable to be grave and look wise.” “He has reversed the Pythagorean discipline, by being first talkative, and then silent. He reverses the course of Nature too: he was first the gay butterfly, and then the creeping worm.” Johnson laughed loud and long at this expansion and illustration of what he himself had told me.</p>
			<p id="III-page-262">We dined together with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Scott (now Sir William Scott,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3615" id="noteref-3615" epub:type="noteref">3615</a> his Majesty’s Advocate General,) at his chambers in the Temple, nobody else there. The company being small, Johnson was not in such spirits as he had been the preceding day, and for a considerable time little was said. At last he burst forth, “Subordination is sadly broken down in this age. No man, now, has the same authority which his father had⁠—except a gaoler. No master has it over his servants: it is diminished in our colleges; nay, in our grammar-schools.” BOSWELL. “What is the cause of this, Sir?” JOHNSON. “Why the coming in of the Scotch,” (laughing sarcastically). BOSWELL. “That is to say, things have been turned topsy turvey.⁠—But your serious cause.” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, there are many causes, the chief of which is, I think, the great increase of money. No man now depends upon the Lord of a Manour, when he can send to another country, and fetch provisions. The shoeblack at the entry of my court does not depend on me. I can deprive him but of a penny a day, which he hopes somebody else will bring him; and that penny I must carry to another shoeblack,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3616" id="noteref-3616" epub:type="noteref">3616</a> so the trade suffers nothing. I have explained, in my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey to the Hebrides</i>, how gold and silver destroy feudal subordination.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3617" id="noteref-3617" epub:type="noteref">3617</a> But, besides, there is a general relaxation of reverence. No son now depends upon his father as in former times. Paternity used to be considered as of itself a great thing, which had a right to many claims. That is, in general, reduced to very small bounds. My hope is, that as anarchy produces tyranny, this extreme relaxation will produce <i xml:lang="la">freni strictio</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3618" id="noteref-3618" epub:type="noteref">3618</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-263">Talking of fame, for which there is so great a desire, I observed how little there is of it in reality, compared with the other objects of human attention. “Let every man recollect, and he will be sensible how small a part of his time is employed in talking or thinking of Shakespeare, Voltaire, or any of the most celebrated men that have ever lived, or are now supposed to occupy the attention and admiration of the world. Let this be extracted and compressed; into what a narrow space will it go<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3619" id="noteref-3619" epub:type="noteref">3619</a>!” I then slyly introduced <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Garrick’s fame, and his assuming the airs of a great man.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3620" id="noteref-3620" epub:type="noteref">3620</a> JOHNSON. “Sir, it is wonderful how <em>little</em> Garrick assumes. No, Sir, Garrick <i xml:lang="la">fortunam reverenter habet</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3621" id="noteref-3621" epub:type="noteref">3621</a> Consider, Sir: celebrated men, such as you have mentioned, have had their applause at a distance; but Garrick had it dashed in his face, sounded in his ears, and went home every night with the plaudits of a thousand in his <i>cranium</i>. Then, Sir, Garrick did not <em>find</em>, but <em>made</em> his way to the tables, the levees, and almost the bedchambers of the great. Then, Sir, Garrick had under him a numerous body of people; who, from fear of his power, and hopes of his favour, and admiration of his talents, were constantly submissive to him. And here is a man who has advanced the dignity of his profession. Garrick has made a player a higher character.” SCOTT. “And he is a very sprightly writer too.” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir; and all this supported by great wealth of his own acquisition. <a id="III-page-264" />If all this had happened to me, I should have had a couple of fellows with long poles walking before me, to knock down everybody that stood in the way. Consider, if all this had happened to Cibber or Quin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3622" id="noteref-3622" epub:type="noteref">3622</a> they’d have jumped over the moon.⁠—Yet Garrick speaks to <em>us</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3623" id="noteref-3623" epub:type="noteref">3623</a>” (smiling.) BOSWELL. “And Garrick is a very good man, a charitable man.” JOHNSON. “Sir, a liberal man. He has given away more money than any man in England.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3624" id="noteref-3624" epub:type="noteref">3624</a> There may be a little vanity mixed; but he has shown, that money is not his first object.” BOSWELL. “Yet Foote used to say of him, that he walked out with an intention to do a generous action; but, turning the corner of a street, he met with the ghost of a halfpenny, which frightened him.” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, that is very true, too; for I never knew a man of whom it could be said with less certainty today, what he will do tomorrow, than Garrick; it depends so much on his humour at the time.” SCOTT. “I am glad to hear of his liberality. He has been represented as very saving.” JOHNSON. “With his domestic saving we have nothing to do. I remember drinking tea with him long ago, when Peg Woffington made it, and he grumbled at her for making it too strong.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3625" id="noteref-3625" epub:type="noteref">3625</a> He had then <a id="III-page-265" />begun to feel money in his purse, and did not know when he should have enough of it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3626" id="noteref-3626" epub:type="noteref">3626</a>”</p>
			<p>On the subject of wealth, the proper use of it, and the effects of that art which is called economy, he observed: “It is wonderful to think how men of very large estates not only spend their yearly incomes, but are often actually in want of money. It is clear, they have not value for what they spend. Lord Shelburne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3627" id="noteref-3627" epub:type="noteref">3627</a> told me, that a man of high rank, who looks into his own affairs, may have all that he ought to have, all that can be of any use, or appear with any advantage, for five thousand pounds a year. Therefore, a great proportion must go in waste; and, indeed, this is the case with most people, whatever their fortune is.” BOSWELL. “I have no doubt, Sir, of this. But how is it? What is waste?” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, breaking bottles, and a thousand other things. Waste cannot be accurately told, though we are sensible how destructive it is. OEconomy on the one hand, by which a certain income is made to maintain a man genteely, and waste on the other, by which, on the same income, another man lives shabbily, cannot be defined. It is a very nice thing: as one man wears his coat out much sooner than another, we cannot tell how.”</p>
			<p>We talked of war. JOHNSON. “Every man thinks meanly of himself for not having been a soldier, or not having been at sea.” BOSWELL. “Lord Mansfield does not.” JOHNSON. “Sir, if Lord Mansfield were in a company of General Officers and Admirals who have been in service, he would shrink; he’d wish to creep under the table.” BOSWELL. “No; he’d think he could <em>try</em> them all.” JOHNSON. “Yes, if he could catch them: but they’d try him much sooner. No, Sir; were Socrates and Charles the Twelfth of Sweden both present in <a id="III-page-266" />any company, and Socrates to say, ‘Follow me, and hear a lecture on philosophy;’ and Charles, laying his hand on his sword, to say, ‘Follow me, and dethrone the Czar;’ a man would be ashamed to follow Socrates. Sir, the impression is universal;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3628" id="noteref-3628" epub:type="noteref">3628</a> yet it is strange. As to the sailor, when you look down from the quarter deck to the space below, you see the utmost extremity of human misery; such crouding, such filth, such stench<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3629" id="noteref-3629" epub:type="noteref">3629</a>!” BOSWELL. “Yet sailors are happy.” JOHNSON. “They are happy as brutes are happy, with a piece of fresh meat⁠—with the grossest sensuality. But, Sir, the profession of soldiers and sailors has the dignity of danger. Mankind reverence those who have got over fear,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3630" id="noteref-3630" epub:type="noteref">3630</a> which is so general a weakness.” SCOTT. “But is not courage mechanical, and to be acquired?” JOHNSON. “Why yes, Sir, in a collective sense. Soldiers consider themselves only as parts of a great machine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3631" id="noteref-3631" epub:type="noteref">3631</a>” SCOTT. “We find people fond of being sailors.” JOHNSON. “I cannot account for that, any more than I can account for other strange perversions of imagination.”</p>
			<p>His abhorrence of the profession of a sailor was uniformly violent;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3632" id="noteref-3632" epub:type="noteref">3632</a> but in conversation he always exalted the profession of a soldier. And yet I have, in my large and various collection of his writings, a letter to an eminent friend, in which he expresses himself thus: “My godson called on me lately. He is weary, and rationally weary, of a military life. If you can place <a id="III-page-267" />him in some other state, I think you may increase his happiness, and secure his virtue. A soldier’s time is passed in distress and danger, or in idleness and corruption.” Such was his cool reflection in his study;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3633" id="noteref-3633" epub:type="noteref">3633</a> but whenever he was warmed and animated by the presence of company, he, like other philosophers, whose minds are impregnated with poetical fancy, caught the common enthusiasm for splendid renown.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3634" id="noteref-3634" epub:type="noteref">3634</a></p>
			<p>He talked of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charles Fox, of whose abilities he thought highly, but observed, that he did not talk much at our CLUB. I have heard <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gibbon remark, “that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fox could not be afraid of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson; yet he certainly was very shy of saying anything in <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s presence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3635" id="noteref-3635" epub:type="noteref">3635</a>” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Scott now quoted what was said of Alcibiades by a Greek poet,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3636" id="noteref-3636" epub:type="noteref">3636</a> to which Johnson assented.</p>
			<p>He told us, that he had given <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu a catalogue of all Daniel Defoe’s works of imagination; most, if not all of which, as well as of his other works, he now enumerated, allowing a considerable share of merit to a man, who, bred <a id="III-page-268" />a tradesman, had written so variously and so well. Indeed, his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Robinson Crusoe</i> is enough of itself to establish his reputation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3637" id="noteref-3637" epub:type="noteref">3637</a></p>
			<p>He expressed great indignation at the imposture of the Cocklane Ghost, and related, with much satisfaction, how he had assisted in detecting the cheat, and had published an account of it in the newspapers.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3638" id="noteref-3638" epub:type="noteref">3638</a> Upon this subject I incautiously offended him, by pressing him with too many questions, and he showed his displeasure. I apologised, saying that “I asked questions in order to be instructed and entertained; I repaired eagerly to the fountain; but that the moment he gave me a hint, the moment he put a lock upon the well, I desisted.”⁠—“But, Sir, (said he,) that is forcing one to do a disagreeable thing:” and he continued to rate me. “Nay, Sir, (said I,) when you have put a lock upon the well, so that I can no longer drink, do not make the fountain of your wit play upon me and wet me.”</p>
			<p>He sometimes could not bear being teazed with questions.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3639" id="noteref-3639" epub:type="noteref">3639</a> I was once present when a gentleman asked so many as, “What did you do, Sir?” “What did you say, Sir?” that he at last grew enraged, and said, “I will not be put to the <em>question</em>. Don’t you consider, Sir, that these are not the manners of a gentleman? I will not be baited with <em>what</em>, and <em>why</em>; what is this? what is that? why is a cow’s tail long? why is a fox’s tail bushy?” The gentleman, who was a good deal out of countenance, said, “Why, Sir, you are so good, that I venture to trouble you.” JOHNSON. “Sir, my being so <em>good</em> is no reason why you should be so <em>ill</em>.”</p>
			<p>Talking of the Justitia hulk at Woolwich, in which criminals were punished, by being confined to labour, he said, “I do not see that they are punished by this: they must have worked equally had they never been guilty of stealing.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3640" id="noteref-3640" epub:type="noteref">3640</a> They now <a id="III-page-269" />only work; so, after all, they have gained; what they stole is clear gain to them; the confinement is nothing. Every man who works is confined: the smith to his shop, the tailor to his garret.” BOSWELL. “And Lord Mansfield to his Court.” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir, you know the notion of confinement may be extended, as in the song, ‘Every island is a prison.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3641" id="noteref-3641" epub:type="noteref">3641</a>’ There is, in Dodsley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collection</i>, a copy of verses to the author of that song.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3642" id="noteref-3642" epub:type="noteref">3642</a>”</p>
			<p>Smith’s Latin verses on Pococke, the great traveller,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3643" id="noteref-3643" epub:type="noteref">3643</a> were mentioned.<br/>
			He repeated some of them, and said they were Smith’s best verses.</p>
			<p>He talked with an uncommon animation of travelling into distant countries; that the mind was enlarged by it, and that an acquisition of dignity of character was derived from it. He expressed a particular enthusiasm with respect to visiting the wall of China. I catched it for the moment,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3644" id="noteref-3644" epub:type="noteref">3644</a> and said I really believed I should go and see the wall of China had I not children, of whom it was my duty to take care. “Sir, (said he,) by doing so, you would do what would be of importance in raising your children to eminence. There would be a lustre reflected upon them from your spirit and curiosity. They would be at all times regarded as the children of a man who had gone to view the wall of China. I am serious, Sir.”</p>
			<p>When we had left <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Scott’s, he said, “Will you go home with me?” “Sir, (said I,) it is late; but I’ll go with you for three minutes.” JOHNSON. “Or <em>four</em>.” We went to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams’s room, where we found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allen the printer, who was the landlord of his house in Bolt-court, a worthy obliging man, and his very old acquaintance; and what was exceedingly amusing, though he was of a very diminutive size, he used, even <a id="III-page-270" />in Johnson’s presence, to imitate the stately periods and slow and solemn utterance of the great man.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3645" id="noteref-3645" epub:type="noteref">3645</a>⁠—I this evening boasted, that although I did not write what is called stenography, or shorthand, in appropriated characters devised for the purpose, I had a method of my own of writing half words, and leaving out some altogether so as yet to keep the substance and language of any discourse which I had heard so much in view, that I could give it very completely soon after I had taken it down. He defied me, as he had once defied an actual shorthand writer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3646" id="noteref-3646" epub:type="noteref">3646</a> and he made the experiment by reading slowly and distinctly a part of Robertson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of America</i>, while I endeavoured to write it in my way of taking notes. It was found that I had it very imperfectly; the conclusion from which was, that its excellence was principally owing to a studied arrangement of words, which could not be varied or abridged without an essential injury.</p>
			<p>On Sunday, April 12, I found him at home before dinner; <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd’s poem entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Thoughts in Prison</i> was lying upon his table. This appearing to me an extraordinary effort by a man who was in Newgate for a capital crime, I was desirous to hear Johnson’s opinion of it: to my surprise, he told me he had not read a line of it. I took up the book and read a passage to him. JOHNSON. “Pretty well, if you are previously disposed to like them.” I read another passage, with which he was better pleased. He then took the book into his own hands, and having looked at the prayer at the end of it, he said, “What <em>evidence</em> is there that this was composed the night before he suffered? <em>I</em> do not believe it.” He then read aloud where he prays for the King, <abbr>etc.</abbr> and observed, “Sir, do you think that a man the night before he is to be hanged cares for the succession of a royal family<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3647" id="noteref-3647" epub:type="noteref">3647</a>?⁠—Though, he <em>may</em> have composed this prayer, then. A man who has been canting all his life, may cant to the last.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3648" id="noteref-3648" epub:type="noteref">3648</a>⁠—And yet a man who has been refused a pardon after so much petitioning, would hardly be praying thus fervently for the King.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-271">He and I, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams, went to dine with the Reverend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy. Talking of Goldsmith, Johnson said, he was very envious.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3649" id="noteref-3649" epub:type="noteref">3649</a> I defended him, by observing that he owned it frankly upon all occasions. JOHNSON. “Sir, you are enforcing the charge. He had so much envy, that he could not conceal it. He was so full of it that he overflowed. He talked of it to be sure often enough. Now, Sir, what a man avows, he is not ashamed to think; though many a man thinks, what he is ashamed to avow. We are all envious naturally;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3650" id="noteref-3650" epub:type="noteref">3650</a> but by checking envy, we get the better of it. So we are all thieves naturally; a child always tries to get at what it wants, the nearest way; by good instruction and good habits this is cured, till a man has not even an inclination to seize what is another’s; has no struggle with himself about it.”</p>
			<p>And here I shall record a scene of too much heat between <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy, which I should have suppressed, were it not that it gave occasion to display the truely tender and benevolent heart of Johnson, who, as soon as he found a friend was at all hurt by anything which he had “said in his wrath,” was not only prompt and desirous to be reconciled, but exerted himself to make ample reparation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3651" id="noteref-3651" epub:type="noteref">3651</a></p>
			<p>Books of Travels having been mentioned, Johnson praised Pennant very highly, as he did at Dunvegan, in the Isle of Sky.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3652" id="noteref-3652" epub:type="noteref">3652</a> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy, knowing himself to be the heir male of the ancient Percies,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3653" id="noteref-3653" epub:type="noteref">3653</a> and having the warmest and most dutiful attachment <a id="III-page-272" />to the noble House of Northumberland, could not sit quietly and hear a man praised, who had spoken disrespectfully of Alnwick-Castle and the Duke’s pleasure grounds, especially as he thought meanly of his travels. He therefore opposed Johnson eagerly. JOHNSON. “Pennant in what he has said of Alnwick, has done what he intended; he has made you very angry.” PERCY. “He has said the garden is <em>trim</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3654" id="noteref-3654" epub:type="noteref">3654</a> which is representing it like a citizen’s parterre, when the truth is, there is a very large extent of fine turf and gravel walks.” JOHNSON. “According to your own account, Sir, Pennant is right. It <em>is</em> trim. Here is grass cut close, and gravel rolled smooth. Is not that trim? The extent is nothing against that; a mile may be as trim as a square yard. Your extent puts me in mind of the citizen’s enlarged dinner, two pieces of roast-beef, and two puddings.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3655" id="noteref-3655" epub:type="noteref">3655</a> There is no variety, no mind exerted in laying out the ground, no trees.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3656" id="noteref-3656" epub:type="noteref">3656</a>” PERCY. “He pretends to give the natural history of Northumberland, and yet takes no notice of the immense number of trees planted there of late.” JOHNSON. “That, Sir, <a id="III-page-273" />has nothing to do with the <em>natural history</em>; that is <em>civil</em> history. A man who gives the natural history of the oak, is not to tell how many oaks have been planted in this place or that. A man who gives the natural history of the cow, is not to tell how many cows are milked at Islington. The animal is the same, whether milked in the Park or at Islington.” PERCY. “Pennant does not describe well; a carrier who goes along the side of Lochlomond would describe it better.” JOHNSON. “I think he describes very well.” PERCY. “I travelled after him.” JOHNSON. “And <em>I</em> travelled after him.” PERCY. “But, my good friend, you are shortsighted, and do not see so well as I do.” I wondered at <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy’s venturing thus. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson said nothing at the time; but inflammable particles were collecting for a cloud to burst. In a little while <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy said something more in disparagement of Pennant. JOHNSON. (pointedly) “This is the resentment of a narrow mind, because he did not find everything in Northumberland.” PERCY. (feeling the stroke) “Sir, you may be as rude as you please.” JOHNSON. “Hold, Sir! Don’t talk of rudeness; remember, Sir, you told me (puffing hard with passion struggling for a vent) I was shortsighted.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3657" id="noteref-3657" epub:type="noteref">3657</a> We have done with civility. We are to be as rude as we please.” PERCY. “Upon my honour, Sir, I did not mean to be uncivil.” JOHNSON. “I cannot say so, Sir; for I <em>did</em> mean to be uncivil, thinking <em>you</em> had been uncivil.” <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy rose, ran up to him, and taking him by the hand, assured him affectionately that his meaning had been misunderstood; upon which a reconciliation instantly took place. JOHNSON. “My dear Sir, I am willing you shall <em>hang</em> Pennant.” PERCY. (resuming the former subject) “Pennant complains that the helmet is not hung out to invite to the hall of hospitality.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3658" id="noteref-3658" epub:type="noteref">3658</a> <a id="III-page-274" />Now I never heard that it was a custom to hang out a <em>helmet</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3659" id="noteref-3659" epub:type="noteref">3659</a>” JOHNSON. “Hang him up, hang him up.” BOSWELL. (humouring the joke) “Hang out his skull instead of a helmet, and you may drink ale out of it in your hall of Odin, as he is your enemy; that will be truly ancient. <i>There</i> will be <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Northern Antiquities</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3660" id="noteref-3660" epub:type="noteref">3660</a>” JOHNSON. “He’s a <em>Whig</em>, Sir; a <em>sad dog</em>. (smiling at his own violent expressions, merely for <em>political</em> difference of opinion.) But he’s the best traveller I ever read; he observes more things than anyone else does.”</p>
			<p>I could not help thinking that this was too high praise of a writer who had traversed a wide extent of country in such haste, that he could put together only curt frittered fragments of his own, and afterwards procured supplemental intelligence from parochial ministers, and others not the best qualified or most impartial narrators, whose ungenerous prejudice against the house of Stuart glares in misrepresentation; a writer, who at best treats merely of superficial objects, and shows no philosophical investigation of character and manners, such as Johnson has exhibited in his masterly <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey</i>, over part of the same ground; and who it should seem from a desire of ingratiating himself with the Scotch, has flattered the people of North-Britain so inordinately and with so little discrimination, that the judicious and candid amongst them must be disgusted, while they value more the plain, just, yet kindly report of Johnson.</p>
			<p>Having impartially censured <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pennant, as a Traveller in Scotland, let me allow him, from authorities much better than mine, his deserved praise as an able Zoologist; and let me also from my own understanding and feelings, acknowledge the merit of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">London</i>, which, though said to be not quite accurate in some particulars, is one of the most pleasing topographical <a id="III-page-275" />performances that ever appeared in any language. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pennant, like his countrymen in general,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3661" id="noteref-3661" epub:type="noteref">3661</a> has the true spirit of a <em>Gentleman</em>. As a proof of it, I shall quote from his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">London</i> the passage, in which he speaks of my illustrious friend. “I must by no means omit <em>Bolt-court</em>, the long residence of Doctor SAMUEL JOHNSON, a man of the strongest natural abilities, great learning, a most retentive memory, of the deepest and most unaffected piety and morality, mingled with those numerous weaknesses and prejudices which his friends have kindly taken care to draw from their dread abode.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3662" id="noteref-3662" epub:type="noteref">3662</a> I brought on myself his transient anger, by observing that in his tour in <em>Scotland</em>, he once had ‘long and woeful experience of oats being the food of men in <em>Scotland</em> as they were of horses in <em>England</em>.’ ” It was a national reflection unworthy of him, and I shot my bolt. In return he gave me a tender hug.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3663" id="noteref-3663" epub:type="noteref">3663</a> <i>Con amore</i> he also said of me “<em>The dog is a Whig</em>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3664" id="noteref-3664" epub:type="noteref">3664</a>” I admired the virtues of Lord <i>Russell</i>, and pitied his fall. I should have been a Whig at the Revolution. There have been periods since, in which I should have been, what I now am, a moderate Tory, a supporter, as far as my little influence extends, of a well-poised balance between the crown and people: but should the scale preponderate against the <i xml:lang="la">Salus populi</i>, that moment may it be said “<em>The dog’s a Whig!</em>”</p>
			<p>We had a calm after the storm, stayed the evening and supped, and were pleasant and gay. But <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy told me he was very uneasy at what had passed; for there was a gentleman there who was acquainted with the Northumberland family, to whom he hoped to have appeared more respectable, by showing how intimate he was with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, and who might now, on the contrary, go away with an opinion to his disadvantage. He begged I would mention this to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, which I afterwards did. His observation upon it was, “This comes of <em>stratagem</em>; <a id="III-page-276" />had he told me that he wished to appear to advantage before that gentleman, he should have been at the top of the house, all the time.” He spoke of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy in the handsomest terms. “Then, Sir, (said I,) may I be allowed to suggest a mode by which you may effectually counteract any unfavourable report of what passed. I will write a letter to you upon the subject of the unlucky contest of that day, and you will be kind enough to put in writing as an answer to that letter, what you have now said, and as Lord Percy is to dine with us at General Paoli’s soon, I will take an opportunity to read the correspondence in his Lordship’s presence.” This friendly scheme was accordingly carried into execution without <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy’s knowledge. Johnson’s letter placed <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy’s unquestionable merit in the fairest point of view; and I contrived that Lord Percy should hear the correspondence, by introducing it at General Paoli’s, as an instance of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s kind disposition towards one in whom his Lordship was interested. Thus every unfavourable impression was obviated that could possibly have been made on those by whom he wished most to be regarded. I breakfasted the day after with him, and informed him of my scheme, and its happy completion, for which he thanked me in the warmest terms, and was highly delighted with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s letter in his praise, of which I gave him a copy. He said, “I would rather have this than degrees from all the Universities in Europe. It will be for me, and my children and grandchildren.” <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson having afterwards asked me if I had given him a copy of it, and being told I had, was offended, and insisted that I should get it back, which I did. As, however, he did not desire me to destroy either the original or the copy, or forbid me to let it be seen, I think myself at liberty to apply to it his general declaration to me concerning his other letters, “That he did not choose they should be published in his lifetime; but had no objection to their appearing after his death.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3665" id="noteref-3665" epub:type="noteref">3665</a>” I shall therefore insert this kindly correspondence, having faithfully narrated the circumstances accompanying it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3666" id="noteref-3666" epub:type="noteref">3666</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-277">“To DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“MY DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I beg leave to address you in behalf of our friend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy, who was much hurt by what you said to him that day we dined at his house;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3667" id="noteref-3667" epub:type="noteref">3667</a> when, in the course of the dispute as to Pennant’s merit as a traveller, you told Percy that ‘he had the resentment of a narrow mind against Pennant, because he did not find everything in Northumberland.’ Percy is sensible that you did not mean to injure him; but he is vexed to think that your behaviour to him upon that occasion may be interpreted as a proof that he is despised by you, which I know is not the case. I have told him, that the charge of being narrow-minded was only as to the particular point in question; and that he had the merit of being a martyr to his noble family.</p>
			<p>“Earl Percy is to dine with General Paoli next Friday; and I should be sincerely glad to have it in my power to satisfy his Lordship how well you think of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy, who, I find, apprehends that your good opinion of him may be of very essential consequence; and who assures me, that he has the highest respect and the warmest affection for you.</p>
			<p>“I have only to add, that my suggesting this occasion for the exercise of your candour and generosity, is altogether unknown to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy, and proceeds from my goodwill towards him, and my persuasion that you will be happy to do him an essential kindness. I am, more and more, my dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most faithful</p>
			<p>“And affectionate humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“SIR,</p>
			<p>“The debate between <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy and me is one of those foolish controversies, which begin upon a question of which neither party cares how it is decided, and which is, nevertheless, continued to acrimony, by the vanity with which every man resists confutation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3668" id="noteref-3668" epub:type="noteref">3668</a> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy’s <a id="III-page-278" />warmth proceeded from a cause which, perhaps, does him more honour than he could have derived from juster criticism. His abhorrence of Pennant proceeded from his opinion that Pennant had wantonly and indecently censured his patron. His anger made him resolve, that, for having been once wrong, he never should be right. Pennant has much in his notions that I do not like; but still I think him a very intelligent traveller. If Percy is really offended, I am sorry; for he is a man whom I never knew to offend anyone. He is a man very willing to learn, and very able to teach; a man, out of whose company I never go without having learned something. It is sure that he vexes me sometimes, but I am afraid it is by making me feel my own ignorance. So much extension of mind, and so much minute accuracy of enquiry, if you survey your whole circle of acquaintance, you will find so scarce, if you find it at all, that you will value Percy by comparison. Lord Hailes is somewhat like him: but Lord Hailes does not, perhaps, go beyond him in research; and I do not know that he equals him in elegance. Percy’s attention to poetry has given grace and splendour to his studies of antiquity. A mere antiquarian is a rugged being.</p>
			<p>“Upon the whole, you see that what I might say in sport or petulance to him, is very consistent with full conviction of his merit.</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most, <abbr>etc.</abbr>,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“April 23, 1778.”</p>
			<p>“TO THE REVEREND DR. PERCY, NORTHUMBERLAND-HOUSE.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I wrote to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson on the subject of the <em>Pennantian</em> controversy; and have received from him an answer which will delight you. I read it yesterday to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Robertson, at the Exhibition; and at dinner to Lord Percy, General Oglethorpe, <abbr>etc.</abbr> who dined with us at General Paoli’s; who was also a witness to the high <em>testimony</em> to your honour.</p>
			<p>“General Paoli desires the favour of your company next Tuesday to dinner, to meet <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson. If I can, I will call on you today. I am, with sincere regard,</p>
			<p>“Your most obedient humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3669" id="noteref-3669" epub:type="noteref">3669</a>”</p>
			<p>“South Audley-street, April 25.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-279">On Monday, April 13, I dined with Johnson at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton’s, where were <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Porteus, then Bishop of Chester, now of London, and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Stinton.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3670" id="noteref-3670" epub:type="noteref">3670</a> He was at first in a very silent mood. Before dinner he said nothing but “Pretty baby,” to one of the children. Langton said very well to me afterwards, that he could repeat Johnson’s conversation before dinner, as Johnson had said that he could repeat a complete chapter of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Natural History of Iceland</i>, from the Danish of <i>Horrebow</i>, the whole of which was exactly thus:⁠—</p>
			<p>“CHAP. LXXII. <i>Concerning snakes</i>.</p>
			<p>“There are no snakes to be met with throughout the whole island.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3671" id="noteref-3671" epub:type="noteref">3671</a>”</p>
			<p>At dinner we talked of another mode in the newspapers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3672" id="noteref-3672" epub:type="noteref">3672</a> of giving modern characters in sentences from the classics, and of the passage</p>
			<p>“Pareus deorum cultor, et infrequens,<br/>
			Insanientis dum sapientiae<br/>
			Consultus erro, nunc retrorsùm<br/>
			Vela dare, atque iterare cursus<br/>
			Cogor relictos<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3673" id="noteref-3673" epub:type="noteref">3673</a>:”</p>
			<p id="III-page-280">being well applied to Soame Jenyns; who, after having wandered in the wilds of infidelity, had returned to the Christian faith.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3674" id="noteref-3674" epub:type="noteref">3674</a> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton asked Johnson as to the propriety of <i xml:lang="la">sapientiae consultus</i>. JOHNSON. “Though <i xml:lang="la">consultus</i> was primarily an adjective, like <i xml:lang="la">amicus</i> it came to be used as a substantive. So we have <i xml:lang="la">Juris consultus</i>, a consult in law.”</p>
			<p>We talked of the styles of different painters, and how certainly a connoisseur could distinguish them; I asked, if there was as clear a difference of styles in language as in painting, or even as in handwriting, so that the composition of every individual may be distinguished? JOHNSON. “Yes. Those who have a style of eminent excellence, such as Dryden and Milton, can always be distinguished.” I had no doubt of this, but what I wanted to know was, whether there was really a peculiar style to every man whatever, as there is certainly a peculiar handwriting, a peculiar countenance, not widely different in many, yet always enough to be distinctive:⁠—</p>
			<p>“… <i xml:lang="la">facies non omnibus una, Nec diversa tamen</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3675" id="noteref-3675" epub:type="noteref">3675</a>”</p>
			<p>The Bishop thought not; and said, he supposed that many pieces in Dodsley’s collection of poems, though all very pretty, had nothing appropriated in their style, and in that particular could not be at all distinguished. JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, I think every man whatever has a peculiar style,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3676" id="noteref-3676" epub:type="noteref">3676</a> which may be discovered by nice examination and comparison with others: but a man must write a great deal to make his style obviously discernible. As logicians say, this appropriation of style is infinite in <i xml:lang="la">potestate</i>, limited <i xml:lang="la">in actu</i>.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-281"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Topham Beauclerk came in the evening, and he and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson and I stayed to supper. It was mentioned that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dodd had once wished to be a member of THE LITERARY CLUB.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3677" id="noteref-3677" epub:type="noteref">3677</a> JOHNSON. “I should be sorry if any of our Club were hanged. I will not say but some of them deserve it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3678" id="noteref-3678" epub:type="noteref">3678</a>” BEAUCLERK; (supposing this to be aimed at persons for whom he had at that time a wonderful fancy, which, however, did not last long,) was irritated, and eagerly said, “You, Sir, have a friend,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3679" id="noteref-3679" epub:type="noteref">3679</a> (naming him) who deserves to be hanged; for he speaks behind their backs against those with whom he lives on the best terms, and attacks them in the newspapers. <em>He</em> certainly ought to be <em>kicked</em>.” JOHNSON. “Sir, we all do this in some degree, ‘<i xml:lang="la">Veniam petimus damusque vicissim</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3680" id="noteref-3680" epub:type="noteref">3680</a>’ To be sure it may be done so much, that a man may deserve to be kicked.” BEAUCLERK. “He is very malignant.” JOHNSON. “No, Sir; he is not malignant. He is mischievous, if you will. He would do no man an essential injury; he may, indeed, love to make sport of people by vexing their vanity. I, however, once knew an old gentleman who was absolutely malignant. He really wished evil to others, and rejoiced at it.” BOSWELL. “The gentleman, <a id="III-page-282" /><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beauclerk, against whom you are so violent, is, I know, a man of good principles.” BEAUCLERK. “Then he does not wear them out in practice.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3681" id="noteref-3681" epub:type="noteref">3681</a>”</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, who, as I have observed before, delighted in discrimination of character, and having a masterly knowledge of human nature, was willing to take men as they are, imperfect and with a mixture of good and bad qualities,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3682" id="noteref-3682" epub:type="noteref">3682</a> I suppose thought he had said enough in defence of his friend, of whose merits, notwithstanding his exceptional points, he had a just value; and added no more on the subject.</p>
			<p>On Tuesday, April 14, I dined with him at General Oglethorpe’s, with General Paoli and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton. General Oglethorpe declaimed against luxury.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3683" id="noteref-3683" epub:type="noteref">3683</a> JOHNSON. “Depend upon it, Sir, every state of society is as luxurious as it can be. Men always take the best they can get.” OGLETHORPE. “But the best depends much upon ourselves; and if we can be as well satisfied with plain things, we are in the wrong to accustom our palates to what is high-seasoned and expensive. What says Addison in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Cato</i>, speaking of the Numidian?</p>
			<p>‘Coarse are his meals, the fortune of the chace,<br/>
			Amid the running stream he slakes his thirst,<br/>
			Toils all the day, and at the approach of night,<br/>
			On the first friendly bank he throws him down,<br/>
			Or rests his head upon a rock till morn;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3684" id="noteref-3684" epub:type="noteref">3684</a><br/>
			And if the following day he chance to find<br/>
			A new repast, or an untasted spring,<br/>
			Blesses his stars, and thinks it’s luxury.’</p>
			<p>Let us have <em>that</em> kind of luxury, Sir, if you will.” JOHNSON. “But hold, Sir; to be merely satisfied is not enough. It is in refinement and elegance that the civilized man differs from the savage. A great part of our industry, and all our ingenuity is exercised in procuring pleasure; and, Sir, a hungry man has not <a id="III-page-283" />the same pleasure in eating a plain dinner, that a hungry man has in eating a luxurious dinner. You see I put the case fairly. A hungry man may have as much, nay, more pleasure in eating a plain dinner, than a man grown fastidious has in eating a luxurious dinner. But I suppose the man who decides between the two dinners, to be equally a hungry man.”</p>
			<p>Talking of different governments⁠—JOHNSON. “The more contracted that power is, the more easily it is destroyed. A country governed by a despot is an inverted cone. Government there cannot be so firm, as when it rests upon a broad basis gradually contracted, as the government of Great Britain, which is founded on the parliament, then is in the privy council, then in the King.” BOSWELL. “Power, when contracted into the person of a despot, may be easily destroyed, as the prince may be cut off. So Caligula wished that the people of Rome had but one neck, that he might cut them off at a blow.” OGLETHORPE. “It was of the Senate he wished that.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3685" id="noteref-3685" epub:type="noteref">3685</a> The Senate by its usurpation controlled both the Emperour and the people. And don’t you think that we see too much of that in our own Parliament?”</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson endeavoured to trace the etymology of Maccaronic verses, which he thought were of Italian invention from Maccaroni; but on being informed that this would infer that they were the most common and easy verses, maccaroni being the most ordinary and simple food, he was at a loss; for he said, “He rather should have supposed it to import in its primitive signification, a composition of several things; for Maccaronic verses are verses made out of a mixture of different languages, that is, of one language with the termination of another.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3686" id="noteref-3686" epub:type="noteref">3686</a>” I suppose we scarcely know of a language in any country where there is any learning, in which that motley ludicrous species of composition may not be found. It is particularly <a id="III-page-284" />droll in Low Dutch. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Polemomiddinia</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3687" id="noteref-3687" epub:type="noteref">3687</a> of Drummond of Hawthornden, in which there is a jumble of many languages moulded, as if it were all in Latin, is well known. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton made us laugh heartily at one in the Grecian mould, by Joshua Barnes, in which are to be found such comical <em>Anglo-Ellenisms</em> as [Greek: Klubboisin ebanchthen]: they were banged with clubs.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3688" id="noteref-3688" epub:type="noteref">3688</a></p>
			<p>On Wednesday, April 15, I dined with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly’s, and was in high spirits, for I had been a good part of the morning with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Orme, the able and eloquent historian of Hindostan, who expressed a great admiration of Johnson. “I do not care (said he,) on what subject Johnson talks; but I love better to hear him talk than anybody. He either gives you new thoughts, or a new colouring. It is a shame to the nation that he has not been more liberally rewarded. Had I been George the Third, and thought as he did about America, I would have given Johnson three hundred a year for his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Taxation no Tyranny</i> alone.” I repeated this, and Johnson was much pleased with such praise from such a man as Orme.</p>
			<p>At <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly’s today were <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knowles,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3689" id="noteref-3689" epub:type="noteref">3689</a> the ingenious Quaker lady,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3690" id="noteref-3690" epub:type="noteref">3690</a> Miss Seward, the poetess of Lichfield, the Reverend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Mayo,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3691" id="noteref-3691" epub:type="noteref">3691</a> and the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beresford, Tutor to the Duke of Bedford. Before dinner <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson seized upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charles Sheridan’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Account of the late Revolution in Sweden</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3692" id="noteref-3692" epub:type="noteref">3692</a> and seemed to read it ravenously, as if he devoured it, which was to all appearance his method of studying. “He knows how to read better than anyone (said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knowles;) he gets at the <a id="III-page-285" />substance of a book directly; he tears out the heart of it.” He kept it wrapt up in the tablecloth in his lap during the time of dinner, from an avidity to have one entertainment in readiness when he should have finished another; resembling (if I may use so coarse a simile) a dog who holds a bone in his paws in reserve, while he eats something else which has been thrown to him.</p>
			<p>The subject of cookery having been very naturally introduced at a table where Johnson, who boasted of the niceness of his palate,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3693" id="noteref-3693" epub:type="noteref">3693</a> owned that “he always found a good dinner,” he said, “I could write a better book of cookery than has ever yet been written; it should be a book upon philosophical principles. Pharmacy is now made much more simple. Cookery may be made so too. A prescription which is now compounded of five ingredients, had formerly fifty in it. So in cookery, if the nature of the ingredients be well known, much fewer will do. Then as you cannot make bad meat good, I would tell what is the best butcher’s meat, the best beef, the best pieces; how to choose young fowls; the proper seasons of different vegetables; and then how to roast and boil, and compound.” DILLY. “<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Glasse’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cookery</i>, which is the best, was written by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hill. Half the <em>trade</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3694" id="noteref-3694" epub:type="noteref">3694</a> know this.” JOHNSON. “Well, Sir. This shows how much better the subject of cookery may be treated by a philosopher. I doubt if the book be written by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hill; for, in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Glasse’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cookery</i>, which I have looked into, saltpetre and sal-prunella are spoken of as different substances, whereas sal-prunella is only saltpetre burnt on charcoal; and Hill could not be ignorant of this. However, as the greatest part of such a book is made by transcription, this mistake may have been carelessly adopted. But you shall see what a Book of Cookery I shall make! I shall agree with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly for the copyright.” Miss SEWARD. “That would be Hercules with the distaff indeed.” JOHNSON. “No, Madam. Women can spin very well; but they cannot make a good book of Cookery.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-286">JOHNSON. “O! <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly⁠—you must know that an English Benedictine Monk at Paris has translated <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Duke of Berwick’s Memoirs</i>, from the original French, and has sent them to me to sell. I offered them to Strahan, who sent them back with this answer:⁠—‘That the first book he had published was the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Duke of Berwick’s Life</i>, by which he had lost: and he hated the name.’⁠—Now I honestly tell you, that Strahan has refused them; but I also honestly tell you, that he did it upon no principle, for he never looked into them.” DILLY. “Are they well translated, Sir?” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, very well⁠—in a style very current and very clear. I have written to the Benedictine to give me an answer upon two points⁠—What evidence is there that the letters are authentic? (for if they are not authentic they are nothing;)⁠—And how long will it be before the original French is published? For if the French edition is not to appear for a considerable time, the translation will be almost as valuable as an original book. They will make two volumes in octavo; and I have undertaken to correct every sheet as it comes from the press.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly desired to see them, and said he would send for them. He asked <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson if he would write a Preface to them. JOHNSON. “No, Sir. The Benedictines were very kind to me,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3695" id="noteref-3695" epub:type="noteref">3695</a> and I’ll do what I undertook to do; but I will not mingle my name with them. I am to gain nothing by them. I’ll turn them loose upon the world, and let them take their chance.” DR. MAYO. “Pray, Sir, are Ganganelli’s letters authentic?” JOHNSON. “No, Sir. Voltaire put the same question to the editor of them, that I did to Macpherson⁠—Where are the originals<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3696" id="noteref-3696" epub:type="noteref">3696</a>?”</p>
			<p id="III-page-287"><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knowles affected to complain that men had much more liberty allowed them than women. JOHNSON. “Why, Madam, women have all the liberty they should wish to have. We have all the labour and the danger, and the women all the advantage. We go to sea, we build houses, we do everything, in short, to pay our court to the women.” MRS. KNOWLES. “The Doctor reasons very wittily, but not convincingly. Now, take the instance of building; the mason’s wife, if she is ever seen in liquor, is ruined; the mason may get himself drunk as often as he pleases, with little loss of character; nay, may let his wife and children starve.” JOHNSON. “Madam, you must consider, if the mason does get himself drunk, and let his wife and children starve, the parish will oblige him to find security for their maintenance. We have different modes of restraining evil. Stocks for the men, a ducking-stool for women,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3697" id="noteref-3697" epub:type="noteref">3697</a> and a pound for beasts. If we require more perfection from women than from ourselves, it is doing them honour. And women have not the same temptations that we have: they may always live in virtuous company; men must mix in the world indiscriminately. If a woman has no inclination to do what is wrong being secured from it is no restraint to her. I am at liberty to walk into the Thames; but if I were to try it, my friends would restrain me in Bedlam, and I should be obliged to them.” MRS. KNOWLES. “Still, Doctor, I cannot help thinking it a hardship that more indulgence is allowed to men than to women. It gives a superiority to men, to which I do not see how they are entitled.” JOHNSON. “It is plain, Madam, one or other must have the superiority. As Shakespeare says, ‘If two men ride on a horse, one must ride behind.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3698" id="noteref-3698" epub:type="noteref">3698</a>’ ” DILLY. “I suppose, Sir, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knowles would have them to ride in panniers, one on each side.” JOHNSON. “Then, Sir, the horse would throw them both.” MRS. KNOWLES. “Well, I hope that in another world the sexes will be equal.” BOSWELL. “That is being too ambitious, Madam. <em>We</em> might as well desire to <a id="III-page-288" />be equal with the angels. We shall all, I hope, be happy in a future state, but we must not expect to be all happy in the same degree. It is enough if we be happy according to our several capacities. A worthy carman will get to heaven as well as Sir Isaac Newton. Yet, though equally good, they will not have the same degrees of happiness.” JOHNSON. “Probably not.”</p>
			<p>Upon this subject I had once before sounded him, by mentioning the late Reverend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brown, of Utrecht’s, image; that a great and small glass, though equally full, did not hold an equal quantity; which he threw out to refute David Hume’s saying,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3699" id="noteref-3699" epub:type="noteref">3699</a> that a little miss, going to dance at a ball, in a fine new dress, was as happy as a great oratour, after having made an eloquent and applauded speech. After some thought, Johnson said, “I come over to the parson.” As an instance of coincidence of thinking, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly told me, that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> King, a late dissenting minister in London, said to him, upon the happiness in a future state of good men of different capacities, “A pail does not hold so much as a tub; but, if it be equally full, it has no reason to complain. Every Saint in heaven will have as much happiness as he can hold.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly thought this a clear, though a familiar illustration of the phrase, “One star differeth from another in brightness.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3700" id="noteref-3700" epub:type="noteref">3700</a>”</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Mayo having asked Johnson’s opinion of Soame Jenyns’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">View of the Internal Evidence of the Christian Religion</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3701" id="noteref-3701" epub:type="noteref">3701</a>⁠—JOHNSON. “I think it a pretty book; not very theological indeed; and there seems to be an affectation of ease and carelessness, as if it were not suitable to his character to be very serious about the matter.” BOSWELL. “He may have intended this to introduce his book the better among genteel people, who might be unwilling to read too grave a treatise. There is a general levity in the age. We have physicians now with bag-wigs;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3702" id="noteref-3702" epub:type="noteref">3702</a> may we not have airy divines, at least somewhat less <a id="III-page-289" />solemn in their appearance than they used to be?” JOHNSON. “Jenyns might mean as you say.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3703" id="noteref-3703" epub:type="noteref">3703</a>” BOSWELL. “You should like his book, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knowles, as it maintains, as you <em>friends</em> do, that courage is not a Christian virtue.” MRS. KNOWLES. “Yes, indeed, I like him there; but I cannot agree with him, that friendship is not a Christian virtue.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3704" id="noteref-3704" epub:type="noteref">3704</a>” JOHNSON. “Why, Madam, strictly speaking, he is right. All friendship is preferring the interest of a friend, to the neglect, or, perhaps, against the interest of others; so that an old Greek said, ‘He that has <em>friends</em> has <em>no friend</em>.’ Now Christianity recommends universal benevolence, to consider all men as our brethren,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3705" id="noteref-3705" epub:type="noteref">3705</a> which is contrary to the virtue of friendship, as described by the ancient philosophers. Surely, Madam, your sect must approve of this; for, you call all men <em>friends</em>.” MRS. KNOWLES. “We are commanded to do good to all men, ‘but especially to them who are of the household of Faith.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3706" id="noteref-3706" epub:type="noteref">3706</a>’ ” JOHNSON. “Well, Madam. The household of Faith is wide enough.” MRS. KNOWLES. “But, Doctor, our Saviour had twelve Apostles, yet there was <em>one</em> whom he <em>loved</em>. John was called ‘the disciple whom JESUS <a id="III-page-290" />loved.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3707" id="noteref-3707" epub:type="noteref">3707</a>’ ” JOHNSON (with eyes sparkling benignantly). “Very well, indeed, Madam. You have said very well.” BOSWELL. “A fine application. Pray, Sir, had you ever thought of it?” JOHNSON. “I had not, Sir.”</p>
			<p>From this pleasing subject,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3708" id="noteref-3708" epub:type="noteref">3708</a> he, I know not how or why, made a sudden transition to one upon which he was a violent aggressor; for he said, “I am willing to love all mankind, <em>except an American</em>:” and his inflammable corruption bursting into horrid fire, he “breathed out threatenings and slaughter;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3709" id="noteref-3709" epub:type="noteref">3709</a>” calling them, “Rascals⁠—Robbers⁠—Pirates;” and exclaiming, he’d “burn and destroy them.” Miss Seward, looking to him with mild but steady astonishment, said, “Sir, this is an instance that we are always most violent against those whom we have injured.”⁠—He was irritated still more by this delicate and keen reproach; and roared out another tremendous volley, which one might fancy could be heard across the Atlantic. During this tempest I sat in great uneasiness, lamenting his heat of temper; till, by degrees, I diverted his attention to other topics.</p>
			<p>DR. MAYO (to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson). “Pray, Sir, have you read <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Edwards, of New England, on Grace</i>?” JOHNSON. “No, Sir.” BOSWELL. “It puzzled me so much as to the freedom of the human will, by stating, with wonderful acute ingenuity, our being actuated by a series of motives which we cannot resist, that the only relief I had was to forget it.” MAYO. “But he makes the proper distinction between moral and physical necessity.” BOSWELL. “Alas, Sir, they come both to the same thing. You may be bound as hard by chains when covered by leather, as when the iron appears. The argument for the moral necessity of human actions is always, I observe, fortified by supposing universal prescience to be one of the attributes of the Deity.” JOHNSON. “You are surer that you are free, than you are of prescience; you are surer that you can lift up your finger or not as you please, than you are of any conclusion from a deduction of reasoning. But let us consider a little the objection from prescience. It is certain I am either to go home tonight or not; that does not prevent my freedom.” BOSWELL. “That <a id="III-page-291" />it is certain you are <em>either</em> to go home or not, does not prevent your freedom; because the liberty of choice between the two is compatible with that certainty. But if <em>one</em> of these events be certain <em>now</em>, you have no <em>future</em> power of volition. If it be certain you are to go home tonight, you <em>must</em> go home.” JOHNSON. “If I am well acquainted with a man, I can judge with great probability how he will act in any case, without his being restrained by my judging. GOD may have this probability increased to certainty.” BOSWELL. “When it is increased to <em>certainty</em>, freedom ceases, because that cannot be certainly foreknown, which is not certain at the time; but if it be certain at the time, it is a contradiction in terms to maintain that there can be afterwards any <em>contingency</em> dependent upon the exercise of will or anything else.” JOHNSON. “All theory is against the freedom of the will; all experience for it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3710" id="noteref-3710" epub:type="noteref">3710</a>”⁠—I did not push the subject any farther. I was glad to find him so mild in discussing a question of the most abstract nature, involved with theological tenets, which he generally would not suffer to be in any degree opposed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3711" id="noteref-3711" epub:type="noteref">3711</a></p>
			<p>He as usual defended luxury;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3712" id="noteref-3712" epub:type="noteref">3712</a> “You cannot spend money in luxury without doing good to the poor. Nay, you do more good to them by spending it in luxury, than by giving it: for by spending it in luxury, you make them exert industry, whereas by giving it, you keep them idle. I own, indeed, there may be more virtue in giving it immediately in charity, than in spending it in luxury; though there may be a pride in that too.” Miss Seward asked, if this was not Mandeville’s doctrine of “private vices public benefits.” JOHNSON. “The fallacy of that book is, that Mandeville defines neither vices nor benefits. He reckons among vices everything that gives pleasure.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3713" id="noteref-3713" epub:type="noteref">3713</a> He takes <a id="III-page-292" />the narrowest system of morality, monastic morality, which holds pleasure itself to be a vice, such as eating salt with our fish, because it makes it eat better; and he reckons wealth as a public benefit, which is by no means always true. Pleasure of itself is not a vice. Having a garden, which we all know to be perfectly innocent, is a great pleasure. At the same time, in this state of being there are many pleasures vices, which however are so immediately agreeable that we can hardly abstain from them. The happiness of Heaven will be, that pleasure and virtue will be perfectly consistent. Mandeville puts the case of a man who gets drunk in an alehouse; and says it is a public benefit, because so much money is got by it to the public. But it must be considered, that all the good gained by this, through the gradation of alehouse-keeper, brewer, maltster, and farmer, is overbalanced by the evil caused to the man and his family by his getting drunk.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3714" id="noteref-3714" epub:type="noteref">3714</a> This is the way to try what is vicious, by ascertaining whether more evil than good is produced by it upon the whole, which is the case in all vice. It may happen that good is produced by vice; but not as vice; for instance, a robber may take money from its owner, and give it to one who will make a better use of it. Here is good produced; but not by the robbery as robbery, but as translation of property.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3715" id="noteref-3715" epub:type="noteref">3715</a> I read Mandeville forty, or, I believe, fifty years ago. He did not puzzle me; he opened my views into real life very much.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3716" id="noteref-3716" epub:type="noteref">3716</a> No, <a id="III-page-293" />it is clear that the happiness of society depends on virtue. In Sparta, theft was allowed by general consent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3717" id="noteref-3717" epub:type="noteref">3717</a>: theft, therefore, was <em>there</em> not a crime, but then there was no security; and what a life must they have had, when there was no security. Without truth there must be a dissolution of society. As it is, there is so little truth, that we are almost afraid to trust our ears; but how should we be, if falsehood were multiplied ten times? Society is held together by communication and information; and I remember this remark of Sir Thomas Brown’s, ‘Do the devils lie? No; for then Hell could not subsist.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3718" id="noteref-3718" epub:type="noteref">3718</a>’ ”</p>
			<p>Talking of Miss ⸺,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3719" id="noteref-3719" epub:type="noteref">3719</a> a literary lady, he said, “I was obliged to speak to Miss Reynolds, to let her know that I desired she would not flatter me so much.” Somebody now observed, “She flatters Garrick.” JOHNSON. “She is in the right to flatter Garrick. She is in the right for two reasons; first, because she has the world with her, who have been praising Garrick these thirty years; and secondly, because she is rewarded for it by Garrick.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3720" id="noteref-3720" epub:type="noteref">3720</a> Why should she flatter <em>me</em>? I can do nothing for her. Let her carry her praise to a better market.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3721" id="noteref-3721" epub:type="noteref">3721</a> <a id="III-page-294" />(Then turning to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knowles). You, Madam, have been flattering me all the evening; I wish you would give Boswell a little now. If you knew his merit as well as I do, you would say a great deal; he is the best travelling companion in the world.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3722" id="noteref-3722" epub:type="noteref">3722</a>”</p>
			<p>Somebody mentioned the Reverend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason’s prosecution of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Murray,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3723" id="noteref-3723" epub:type="noteref">3723</a> the bookseller, for having inserted in a collection of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Gray’s Poems</i>, only fifty lines, of which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason had still the exclusive property, under the statute of Queen Anne; and that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason had persevered, notwithstanding his being requested to name his own terms of compensation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3724" id="noteref-3724" epub:type="noteref">3724</a> Johnson signified his displeasure at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mason’s conduct very strongly; but added, by way of showing that he was not surprised at it, “Mason’s a Whig.” MRS. KNOWLES, (not hearing distinctly:) “What! a Prig, Sir?” JOHNSON. “Worse, Madam; a Whig! But he is both.”</p>
			<p>I expressed a hrror at the thought of death. MRS. KNOWLES. “Nay, thou should’st not have a hrror for what is the gate of life.” JOHNSON, (standing upon the hearth rolling about, with a serious, solemn, and somewhat gloomy air:) “No rational man can die without uneasy apprehension.” MRS. KNOWLES. “The Scriptures tell us, ‘The righteous shall have <em>hope</em> in his death.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3725" id="noteref-3725" epub:type="noteref">3725</a>’ ” JOHNSON. “Yes, Madam; that is, he shall not have despair.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3726" id="noteref-3726" epub:type="noteref">3726</a> But, consider, his hope of salvation must be founded on the terms on which it is promised that the mediation of our SAVIOUR shall be applied to us⁠—namely, obedience; and where obedience has failed, then, as suppletory to it, repentance. But what man can say that his obedience has been such, as he would approve <a id="III-page-295" />of in another, or even in himself upon close examination, or that his repentance has not been such as to require being repented of? No man can be sure that his obedience and repentance will obtain salvation.” MRS. KNOWLES. “But divine intimation of acceptance may be made to the soul.” JOHNSON. “Madam, it may; but I should not think the better of a man who should tell me on his deathbed he was sure of salvation. A man cannot be sure himself that he has divine intimation of acceptance; much less can he make others sure that he has it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3727" id="noteref-3727" epub:type="noteref">3727</a>” BOSWELL. “Then, Sir, we must be contented to acknowledge that death is a terrible thing.” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir. I have made no approaches to a state which can look on it as not terrible.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3728" id="noteref-3728" epub:type="noteref">3728</a>” MRS. KNOWLES, (seeming to enjoy a pleasing serenity in the persuasion of benignant divine light:) “Does not <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul say, ‘I have fought the good fight of faith, I have finished my course; henceforth is laid up for me a crown of life<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3729" id="noteref-3729" epub:type="noteref">3729</a>?’ ” JOHNSON. “Yes, Madam; but here was a man inspired, a man who had been converted by supernatural interposition.” BOSWELL. “In prospect death is dreadful; but in fact we find that people die easy.” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, most people have not <em>thought</em> much of the matter, so cannot <em>say</em> much, and it is supposed they die easy. Few believe it certain they are then to die; and those who do, set themselves to behave with resolution, as a man does who is going to be hanged. He is not the less unwilling to be hanged.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3730" id="noteref-3730" epub:type="noteref">3730</a>” MISS SEWARD. “There is one mode of the fear of death, which is certainly absurd; and that is the dread of annihilation, which is only a pleasing sleep without a dream.” JOHNSON. “It is neither pleasing, nor sleep; it is nothing. Now mere existence <a id="III-page-296" />is so much better than nothing, that one would rather exist even in pain, than not exist.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3731" id="noteref-3731" epub:type="noteref">3731</a>” BOSWELL. “If annihilation be nothing, then existing in pain is not a comparative state, but is a positive evil, which I cannot think we should choose. I must be allowed to differ here; and it would lessen the hope of a future state founded on the argument, that the Supreme Being, who is good as he is great, will hereafter compensate for our present sufferings in this life. For if existence, such as we have it here, be comparatively a good, we have no reason to complain, though no more of it should be given to us. But if our only state of existence were in this world, then we might with some reason complain that we are so dissatisfied with our enjoyments compared with our desires.” JOHNSON. “The lady confounds annihilation, which is nothing, with the apprehension of it, which is dreadful. It is in the apprehension of it that the hrror of annihilation consists.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3732" id="noteref-3732" epub:type="noteref">3732</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-297">Of John Wesley, he said, “He can talk well on any subject.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3733" id="noteref-3733" epub:type="noteref">3733</a>” BOSWELL. “Pray, Sir, what has he made of his story of a ghost?” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, he believes it; but not on sufficient authority. He did not take time enough to examine the girl. It was at Newcastle, where the ghost was said to have appeared to a young woman several times, mentioning something about the right to an old house, advising application to be made to an attorney, which was done; and, at the same time, saying the attorney would do nothing, which proved to be the fact. ‘This (says John) is a proof that a ghost knows our thoughts.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3734" id="noteref-3734" epub:type="noteref">3734</a>’ Now (laughing) it is not necessary to know our thoughts, to tell that an attorney will sometimes do nothing. Charles Wesley, who is a more stationary man, does not believe the story. I am sorry that John did not take more pains to inquire into the evidence for it.” MISS SEWARD, (with an incredulous smile:) “What, Sir! <a id="III-page-298" />about a ghost?” JOHNSON, (with solemn vehemence:) “Yes, Madam: this is a question which, after five thousand years, is yet undecided; a question, whether in theology or philosophy, one of the most important that can come before the human understanding.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3735" id="noteref-3735" epub:type="noteref">3735</a>”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knowles mentioned, as a proselyte to Quakerism, Miss ⸺,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3736" id="noteref-3736" epub:type="noteref">3736</a> a young lady well known to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, for whom he had shown much affection; while she ever had, and still retained, a great respect for him. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knowles at the same time took an opportunity of letting him know “that the amiable young creature was sorry at finding that he was offended at her leaving the Church of England and embracing a simpler faith;” and, in the gentlest and most persuasive manner, solicited his kind indulgence for what was sincerely a matter of conscience. JOHNSON, (frowning very angrily,) “Madam, she is an odious wench. She could not have any proper conviction that it was her duty to change her religion, which is the most important of all subjects, and should be studied with all care, and with all the helps we can get. She knew no more of the Church which she left, and that which she embraced, than she did of the difference between the Copernican and Ptolemaic systems.” MRS. KNOWLES. “She had the New Testament before her.” JOHNSON. “Madam, she could not understand the New Testament, the most difficult book in the world, for which the study of a life is required.” MRS. KNOWLES. “It is clear as to essentials.” JOHNSON. “But not as to controversial points. The heathens were easily converted, because they had nothing to give up; but we ought not, <a id="III-page-299" />without very strong conviction indeed, to desert the religion in which we have been educated. That is the religion given you, the religion in which it may be said Providence has placed you. If you live conscientiously in that religion, you may be safe. But error is dangerous indeed, if you err when you choose a religion for yourself.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3737" id="noteref-3737" epub:type="noteref">3737</a>” MRS. KNOWLES. “Must we then go by implicit faith?” JOHNSON. “Why, Madam, the greatest part of our knowledge is implicit faith; and as to religion, have we heard all that a disciple of Confucius, all that a Muhammadan, can say for himself?” He then rose again into passion, and attacked the young proselyte in the severest terms of reproach, so that both the ladies seemed to be much shocked.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3738" id="noteref-3738" epub:type="noteref">3738</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-300">We remained together till it was pretty late. Notwithstanding occasional explosions of violence, we were all delighted upon the whole with Johnson. I compared him at this time to a warm West-Indian climate, where you have a bright sun, quick vegetation, luxuriant foliage, luscious fruits; but where the same heat sometimes produces thunder, lightning, earthquakes, in a terrible degree.</p>
			<p>April 17, being Good Friday,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3739" id="noteref-3739" epub:type="noteref">3739</a> I waited on Johnson, as usual. I observed at breakfast that although it was a part of his abstemious discipline on this most solemn fast, to take no milk in his tea, yet when <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Desmoulins inadvertently poured it in, he did not reject it. I talked of the strange indecision of mind, and imbecility in the common occurrences of life, which we may observe in some people. JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, I am in the habit of getting others to do things for me.” BOSWELL. “What, Sir! have you that weakness?” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir. But I always think afterwards I should have done better for myself.” I told him that at a gentleman’s house<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3740" id="noteref-3740" epub:type="noteref">3740</a> where there was thought to be such extravagance or bad management, that he was living much beyond his income, his lady had objected to the cutting of a pickled mango, and that I had taken an opportunity to ask the price of it, and found it was only two shillings; so here was a very poor saving. JOHNSON. “Sir, that is the blundering economy of a narrow understanding. It is stopping one hole in a sieve.”</p>
			<p>I expressed some inclination to publish an account of my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels</i> upon the continent of Europe, for which I had a variety of materials collected. JOHNSON. “I do not say, Sir, you may not publish your travels; but I give you my opinion, that you would lessen yourself by it. What can you tell of countries so well known as those upon the continent of Europe, which you have visited?” BOSWELL. “But I can give an entertaining narrative, with many incidents, anecdotes, <i xml:lang="fr">jeux d’esprit</i>, and remarks, so as to make very pleasant reading.” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, most modern travellers in Europe who have published their travels, have been laughed at: I would not have you <a id="III-page-301" />added to the number.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3741" id="noteref-3741" epub:type="noteref">3741</a> The world is now not contented to be merely entertained by a traveller’s narrative; they want to learn something.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3742" id="noteref-3742" epub:type="noteref">3742</a> Now some of my friends asked me, why I did not give some account of my travels in France. The reason is plain; intelligent readers had seen more of France than I had. <em>You</em> might have liked my travels in France, and THE CLUB might have liked them; but, upon the whole, there would have been more ridicule than good produced by them.” BOSWELL. “I cannot agree with you, Sir. People would like to read what you say of anything. Suppose a face has been painted by fifty painters before; still we love to see it done by Sir Joshua.” JOHNSON. “True, Sir, but Sir Joshua cannot paint a face when he has not time to look on it.” BOSWELL. “Sir, a sketch of any sort by him is valuable. And, Sir, to talk to you in your own style (raising my voice, and shaking my head,) you <em>should</em> have given us your travels in France. I am <em>sure</em> I am right, and <em>there’s an end on’t</em>.”</p>
			<p>I said to him that it was certainly true, as my friend Dempster had observed in his letter to me upon the subject, that a great part of what was in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland</i> had been in his mind before he left London. JOHNSON. “Why yes, Sir, the topics were; and books of travels<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3743" id="noteref-3743" epub:type="noteref">3743</a> will be good in proportion to what a man has previously in his mind; his knowing what to observe; his power of contrasting <a id="III-page-302" />one mode of life with another. As the Spanish proverb says, ‘He, who would bring home the wealth of the Indies, must carry the wealth of the Indies with him.’ So it is in travelling; a man must carry knowledge with him, if he would bring home knowledge.” BOSWELL. “The proverb, I suppose, Sir, means, he must carry a large stock with him to trade with.” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir.”</p>
			<p>It was a delightful day: as we walked to <abbr>St.</abbr> Clement’s church,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3744" id="noteref-3744" epub:type="noteref">3744</a> I again remarked that Fleet-street was the most cheerful scene in the world.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3745" id="noteref-3745" epub:type="noteref">3745</a> “Fleet-street (said I,) is in my mind more delightful than Tempé.” JOHNSON. “Ay, Sir; but let it be compared with Mull.”</p>
			<p>There was a very numerous congregation today at <abbr>St.</abbr> Clement’s church, which <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson said he observed with pleasure.</p>
			<p>And now I am to give a pretty full account of one of the most curious incidents in Johnson’s life, of which he himself has made the following minute on this day: “In my return from church, I was accosted by Edwards,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3746" id="noteref-3746" epub:type="noteref">3746</a> an old fellow-collegian, who had not seen me since 1729. He knew me, and asked if I remembered one Edwards; I did not at first recollect the name, but gradually as we walked along, recovered it, and told him a conversation that had passed at an alehouse between us. My purpose is to continue our acquaintance.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3747" id="noteref-3747" epub:type="noteref">3747</a>”</p>
			<p>It was in Butcher-row that this meeting happened. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edwards, who was a decent-looking elderly man in grey clothes, and a wig of many curls, accosted Johnson with familiar confidence, knowing who he was, while Johnson returned his salutation with a courteous formality, as to a stranger. But as soon as Edwards had brought to his recollection their having been at Pembroke-College together nine-and-forty years ago, he seemed much pleased, asked where he lived, and said he should be glad to see him in Bolt-court. EDWARDS. “Ah, Sir! we are old men now.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3748" id="noteref-3748" epub:type="noteref">3748</a>” JOHNSON, (who never liked to think of being <a id="III-page-303" />old<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3749" id="noteref-3749" epub:type="noteref">3749</a>:) “Don’t let us discourage one another.” EDWARDS. “Why, Doctor, you look stout and hearty, I am happy to see you so; for the newspapers told us you were very ill.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3750" id="noteref-3750" epub:type="noteref">3750</a>” JOHNSON, “Ay, Sir, they are always telling lies of <em>us old fellows</em>.”</p>
			<p>Wishing to be present at more of so singular a conversation as that between two fellow-collegians, who had lived forty years in London without ever having chanced to meet, I whispered to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edwards that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson was going home, and that he had better accompany him now. So Edwards walked along with us, I eagerly assisting to keep up the conversation. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edwards informed <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson that he had practised long as a solicitor in Chancery, but that he now lived in the country upon a little farm, about sixty acres, just by Stevenage in Hertfordshire, and that he came to London (to Barnard’s Inn, <abbr>No.</abbr> 6), generally twice a week. Johnson appearing to me in a reverie, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edwards addressed himself to me, and expatiated on the pleasure of living in the country. BOSWELL. “I have no notion of this, Sir. What you have to entertain you, is, I think, exhausted in half an hour.” EDWARDS. “What? don’t you love to have hope realized? I see my grass, and my corn, and my trees growing. Now, for instance, I am curious to see if this frost has not nipped my fruit-trees.” JOHNSON, (who we did not imagine was attending:) “You find, Sir, you have fears as well as hopes.”⁠—So well did he see the whole, when another saw but the half of a subject.</p>
			<p>When we got to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s house, and were seated in his library, the dialogue went on admirably. EDWARDS. “Sir, I remember you would not let us say <q>prodigious</q> at College.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3751" id="noteref-3751" epub:type="noteref">3751</a> For even then, Sir, (turning to me,) he was delicate in language, and we all feared him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3752" id="noteref-3752" epub:type="noteref">3752</a>” JOHNSON, (to Edwards:) “From your having practised the law long, Sir, I presume you must be rich.” EDWARDS. “No, Sir; I got a good deal of money; but I had a number of poor relations to whom I gave a great part of it.” <a id="III-page-304" />JOHNSON. “Sir, you have been rich in the most valuable sense of the word.” EDWARDS. “But I shall not die rich.” JOHNSON. “Nay, sure, Sir, it is better to <em>live</em> rich than to <em>die</em> rich.” EDWARDS. “I wish I had continued at College.” JOHNSON. “Why do you wish that, Sir?” EDWARDS. “Because I think I should have had a much easier life than mine has been. I should have been a parson, and had a good living, like Bloxam and several others, and lived comfortably.” JOHNSON. “Sir, the life of a parson, of a conscientious clergyman, is not easy. I have always considered a clergyman as the father of a larger family than he is able to maintain. I would rather have Chancery suits upon my hands than the cure of souls. No, Sir, I do not envy a clergyman’s life as an easy life,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3753" id="noteref-3753" epub:type="noteref">3753</a> nor do I envy the clergyman who makes it an easy life.” Here taking himself up all of a sudden, he exclaimed, “O! <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edwards! I’ll convince you that I recollect you. Do you remember our drinking together at an alehouse near Pembroke gate.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3754" id="noteref-3754" epub:type="noteref">3754</a> At that time, you told me of the Eton boy, who, when verses on our Saviour’s turning water into wine were prescribed as an exercise, brought up a single line, which was highly admired⁠—</p>
			<p>‘<i xml:lang="la">Vidit et erubuit lympha pudica Deum</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3755" id="noteref-3755" epub:type="noteref">3755</a>’</p>
			<p>and I told you of another fine line in Camden’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Remains</i>, an eulogy upon one of our Kings, who was succeeded by his son, a prince of equal merit:⁠—</p>
			<p>‘<i xml:lang="la">Mira cano, Sol occubuit, nox nulla secuta est</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3756" id="noteref-3756" epub:type="noteref">3756</a>’ ”</p>
			<p id="III-page-305">EDWARDS. “You are a philosopher, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson. I have tried too in my time to be a philosopher; but, I don’t know how, cheerfulness was always breaking in.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3757" id="noteref-3757" epub:type="noteref">3757</a>” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burke, Sir Joshua Reynolds, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Courtenay, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Malone, and, indeed, all the eminent men to whom I have mentioned this, have thought it an exquisite trait of character. The truth is, that philosophy, like religion, is too generally supposed to be hard and severe, at least so grave as to exclude all gaiety.</p>
			<p>EDWARDS. “I have been twice married, Doctor. You, I suppose, have never known what it was to have a wife.” JOHNSON. “Sir, I have known what it was to have a wife, and (in a solemn tender faultering tone) I have known what it was to <em>lose a wife</em>.⁠—It had almost broke my heart.”</p>
			<p>EDWARDS. “How do you live, Sir? For my part, I must have my regular meals, and a glass of good wine. I find I require it.” JOHNSON. “I now drink no wine, Sir. Early in life I drank wine: for many years I drank none. I then for some years drank a great deal.” EDWARDS. “Some hogsheads, I warrant you.” JOHNSON. “I then had a severe illness, and left it off,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3758" id="noteref-3758" epub:type="noteref">3758</a> and I have never begun it again. I never felt any difference upon myself from eating one thing rather than another, nor from one kind of weather rather than another.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3759" id="noteref-3759" epub:type="noteref">3759</a> There are <a id="III-page-306" />people. I believe, who feel a difference; but I am not one of them. And as to regular meals, I have fasted from the Sunday’s dinner to the Tuesday’s dinner, without any inconvenience.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3760" id="noteref-3760" epub:type="noteref">3760</a> I believe it is best to eat just as one is hungry: but a man who is in business, or a man who has a family, must have stated meals. I am a straggler. I may leave this town and go to Grand Cairo, without being missed here or observed there.” EDWARDS. “Don’t you eat supper, Sir?” JOHNSON. “No, Sir.” EDWARDS. “For my part, now, I consider supper as a turnpike through which one must pass, in order to get to bed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3761" id="noteref-3761" epub:type="noteref">3761</a>”</p>
			<p>JOHNSON. “You are a lawyer, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edwards. Lawyers know life practically. A bookish man should always have them to converse with. They have what he wants.” EDWARDS. “I am grown old: I am sixty-five.” JOHNSON. “I shall be sixty-eight<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3762" id="noteref-3762" epub:type="noteref">3762</a> next birthday. Come, Sir, drink water, and put in for a hundred.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edwards mentioned a gentleman who had left his whole fortune to Pembroke College. JOHNSON. “Whether to leave one’s whole fortune to a College be right, must depend upon circumstances. I would leave the interest of the fortune I bequeathed to a College to my relations or my friends, for their lives.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3763" id="noteref-3763" epub:type="noteref">3763</a> It is the same thing to a College, which is a permanent society, whether it gets the money now or twenty years hence; and I would wish to make my relations or friends feel the benefit of it.”</p>
			<p>This interview confirmed my opinion of Johnson’s most humane and benevolent heart. His cordial and placid behaviour to an old fellow-collegian, a man so different from himself; and his telling him that he would go down to his farm and visit him, showed a kindness of disposition very rare at an advanced age. He observed, “how wonderful it was that they had both been in London forty years, without having ever once met, and both walkers in the street too!” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edwards, when going away, again recurred to his consciousness of senility, and looking full in Johnson’s face, said to him, “You’ll find in <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Young,</p>
			<p id="III-page-307">‘O my coevals! remnants of yourselves<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3764" id="noteref-3764" epub:type="noteref">3764</a>!’ ”</p>
			<p>Johnson did not relish this at all; but shook his head with impatience. Edwards walked off, seemingly highly pleased with the honour of having been thus noticed by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson. When he was gone, I said to Johnson, I thought him but a weak man. JOHNSON. “Why, yes, Sir. Here is a man who has passed through life without experience: yet I would rather have him with me than a more sensible man who will not talk readily. This man is always willing to say what he has to say.” Yet <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson had himself by no means that willingness which he praised so much, and I think so justly; for who has not felt the painful effect of the dreary void, when there is a total silence in a company, for any length of time; or, which is as bad, or perhaps worse, when the conversation is with difficulty kept up by a perpetual effort?</p>
			<p>Johnson once observed to me, “Tom Tyers described me the best: ‘Sir (said he), you are like a ghost: you never speak till you are spoken to.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3765" id="noteref-3765" epub:type="noteref">3765</a>’ ”</p>
			<p id="III-page-308">The gentleman whom he thus familiarly mentioned was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas Tyers, son of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jonathan Tyers, the founder of that excellent place of public amusement, Vauxhall Gardens, which must ever be an estate to its proprietor, as it is peculiarly adapted to the taste of the English nation; there being a mixture of curious show⁠—gay exhibition⁠—music, vocal and instrumental, not too refined for the general ear;⁠—for all which only a shilling is paid;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3766" id="noteref-3766" epub:type="noteref">3766</a> and, though last, not least, good eating and drinking for those who choose to purchase that regale.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3767" id="noteref-3767" epub:type="noteref">3767</a> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas Tyers was bred to the law; but having a handsome fortune, vivacity of temper, and eccentricity of mind, he could not confine himself to the regularity of practice. He therefore ran about the world with a pleasant carelessness, amusing everybody by his desultory conversation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3768" id="noteref-3768" epub:type="noteref">3768</a> He abounded in anecdote, but was not sufficiently attentive to accuracy. I therefore cannot venture to avail myself much of a biographical sketch of Johnson which he published, being one among the various persons ambitious of appending their <a id="III-page-309" />names to that of my illustrious friend. That sketch is, however, an entertaining little collection of fragments. Those which he published of Pope and Addison are of higher merit; but his fame must chiefly rest upon his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Political Conferences</i>, in which he introduces several eminent persons delivering their sentiments in the way of dialogue, and discovers a considerable share of learning, various knowledge, and discernment of character. This much may I be allowed to say of a man who was exceedingly obliging to me, and who lived with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson in as easy a manner as almost any of his very numerous acquaintance.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edwards had said to me aside, that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson should have been of a profession.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3769" id="noteref-3769" epub:type="noteref">3769</a> I repeated the remark to Johnson that I might have his own thoughts on the subject. JOHNSON. “Sir, it <em>would</em> have been better that I had been of a profession. I ought to have been a lawyer.” BOSWELL. “I do not think, Sir, it would have been better, for we should not have had the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">English Dictionary</i>.” JOHNSON. “But you would have had <em>Reports</em>.” BOSWELL. “Ay; but there would not have been another, who could have written the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i>. There have been many very good Judges. Suppose you had been Lord Chancellor; you would have delivered opinions with more extent of mind, and in a more ornamented manner, than perhaps any Chancellor ever did, or ever will do. But, I believe, causes have been as judiciously decided as you could have done.” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir. Property has been as well settled.”</p>
			<p>Johnson, however, had a noble ambition floating in his mind, and had, undoubtedly, often speculated on the possibility of his supereminent powers being rewarded in this great and liberal country by the highest honours of the state. Sir William Scott informs me, that upon the death of the late Lord Lichfield, who was Chancellor of the University of Oxford, he said to Johnson, “What a pity it is, Sir, that you did not follow the profession <a id="III-page-310" />of the law.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3770" id="noteref-3770" epub:type="noteref">3770</a> You might have been Lord Chancellor of Great Britain, and attained to the dignity of the peerage; and now that the title of Lichfield, your native city, is extinct, you might have had it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3771" id="noteref-3771" epub:type="noteref">3771</a>” Johnson, upon this, seemed much agitated; and, in an angry tone, exclaimed, “Why will you vex me by suggesting this, when it is too late<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3772" id="noteref-3772" epub:type="noteref">3772</a>?”</p>
			<p>But he did not repine at the prosperity of others. The late <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Thomas Leland told <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Courtenay, that when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edmund Burke showed Johnson his fine house and lands near Beaconsfield, Johnson coolly said, “Non equidem invideo; miror magis.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3773" id="noteref-3773" epub:type="noteref">3773</a>”</p>
			<p>Yet no man had a higher notion of the dignity of literature than Johnson, or was more determined in maintaining the respect which he justly considered as due to it. Of this, besides the general tenor of his conduct in society, some characteristical instances may be mentioned.</p>
			<p id="III-page-311">He told Sir Joshua Reynolds, that once when he dined in a numerous company of booksellers, where the room being small, the head of the table, at which he sat, was almost close to the fire, he persevered in suffering a great deal of inconvenience from the heat, rather than quit his place, and let one of them sit above him.</p>
			<p>Goldsmith, in his diverting simplicity, complained one day, in a mixed company, of Lord Camden. “I met him (said he) at Lord Clare’s house<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3774" id="noteref-3774" epub:type="noteref">3774</a> in the country, and he took no more notice of me than if I had been an ordinary man.” The company having laughed heartily, Johnson stood forth in defence of his friend. “Nay, Gentleman, (said he,) <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Goldsmith is in the right. A nobleman ought to have made up to such a man as Goldsmith; and I think it is much against Lord Camden that he neglected him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3775" id="noteref-3775" epub:type="noteref">3775</a>”</p>
			<p>Nor could he patiently endure to hear that such respect as he thought due only to higher intellectual qualities, should be bestowed on men of slighter, though perhaps more amusing talents. I told him, that one morning, when I went to breakfast with Garrick, who was very vain of his intimacy with Lord Camden,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3776" id="noteref-3776" epub:type="noteref">3776</a> he accosted me thus:⁠—“Pray now, did you⁠—did you meet a little lawyer turning the corner, eh?”⁠—“No, Sir, (said I.) Pray what do you mean by the question?”⁠—“Why, (replied Garrick, with an affected indifference, yet as if standing on tiptoe,) Lord Camden has this moment left me. We have had a long walk together.” JOHNSON. “Well, Sir, Garrick talked very properly. Lord Camden <em>was a little lawyer</em> to be associating so familiarly with a player.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-312">Sir Joshua Reynolds observed, with great truth, that Johnson considered Garrick to be as it were his <em>property</em>. He would allow no man either to blame or to praise Garrick in his presence, without contradicting him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3777" id="noteref-3777" epub:type="noteref">3777</a></p>
			<p>Having fallen into a very serious frame of mind, in which mutual expressions of kindness passed between us, such as would be thought too vain in me to repeat, I talked with regret of the sad inevitable certainty that one of us must survive the other. JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir, that is an affecting consideration. I remember Swift, in one of his letters to Pope, says, ‘I intend to come over, that we may meet once more; and when we must part, it is what happens to all human beings.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3778" id="noteref-3778" epub:type="noteref">3778</a>’ ” BOSWELL. “The hope that we shall see our departed friends<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3779" id="noteref-3779" epub:type="noteref">3779</a> again must support the mind.” JOHNSON. “Why yes, Sir.” BOSWELL. “There is a strange unwillingness to part with life, independent of serious fears as to futurity. A reverend friend of ours (naming him) tells me, that he feels an uneasiness at the thoughts of leaving his house, his study, his books.” JOHNSON. “This is foolish in ⸺.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3780" id="noteref-3780" epub:type="noteref">3780</a> A man need not be uneasy on these grounds; for, as he will retain his consciousness, he may say with the philosopher, <i xml:lang="la">Omnia mea mecum porto</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3781" id="noteref-3781" epub:type="noteref">3781</a>” BOSWELL. “True, Sir: we may carry our books in our heads; but still there is something painful in the thought of leaving forever what has given us pleasure. I remember, many years ago, when my imagination was warm, and I happened to be in a melancholy mood, it distressed me to think of going into a state of being in which Shakespeare’s poetry did not exist. A lady whom I then much <a id="III-page-313" />admired, a very amiable woman, humoured my fancy, and relieved me by saying, ‘The first thing you will meet in the other world, will be an elegant copy of Shakespeare’s works presented to you.’ ” <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson smiled benignantly at this, and did not appear to disapprove of the notion.</p>
			<p>We went to <abbr>St.</abbr> Clement’s church again in the afternoon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3782" id="noteref-3782" epub:type="noteref">3782</a> and then returned and drank tea and coffee in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams’s room; <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Desmoulins doing the honours of the tea-table. I observed that he would not even look at a proof-sheet of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Waller</i> on Good-Friday.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allen, the printer, brought a book on agriculture, which was printed, and was soon to be published.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3783" id="noteref-3783" epub:type="noteref">3783</a> It was a very strange performance, the author having mixed in it his own thoughts upon various topics, along with his remarks on ploughing, sowing, and other farming operations. He seemed to be an absurd profane fellow, and had introduced in his book many sneers at religion, with equal ignorance and conceit. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson permitted me to read some passages aloud. One was, that he resolved to work on Sunday, and did work, but he owned he felt <em>some</em> weak compunction; and he had this very curious reflection:⁠—“I was born in the wilds of Christianity, and the briars and thorns still hang about me.” <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson could not help laughing at this ridiculous image, yet was very angry at the fellow’s impiety. “However, (said he,) the Reviewers will make him hang himself.” He, however, observed, “that formerly there might have been a dispensation obtained for working on Sunday in the time of harvest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3784" id="noteref-3784" epub:type="noteref">3784</a>” Indeed in ritual observances, were all the ministers of religion what they should be, and what many of them are, such a power might be wisely and safely lodged with the Church.</p>
			<p id="III-page-314">On Saturday, April 14,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3785" id="noteref-3785" epub:type="noteref">3785</a> I drank tea with him. He praised the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Buncombe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3786" id="noteref-3786" epub:type="noteref">3786</a> of Canterbury, as a pleasing man. “He used to come to me: I did not seek much after him. Indeed I never sought much after anybody.” BOSWELL. “Lord Orrery,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3787" id="noteref-3787" epub:type="noteref">3787</a> I suppose.” JOHNSON. “No, Sir; I never went to him but when he sent for me.” BOSWELL. “Richardson<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3788" id="noteref-3788" epub:type="noteref">3788</a>?” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir. But I sought after George Psalmanazar the most. I used to go and sit with him at an alehouse in the city.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3789" id="noteref-3789" epub:type="noteref">3789</a>”</p>
			<p>I am happy to mention another instance which I discovered of his <em>seeking after</em> a man of merit. Soon after the Honourable Daines Barrington had published his excellent <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Observations on the Statutes</i>, Johnson waited on that worthy and learned gentleman; and, having told him his name, courteously said, “I have read your book, Sir, with great pleasure, and wish to be better known to you.” Thus began an acquaintance, which was continued with mutual regard as long as Johnson lived.</p>
			<p id="III-page-315">Talking of a recent seditious delinquent,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3790" id="noteref-3790" epub:type="noteref">3790</a> he said, “They should set him in the pillory, that he may be punished in a way that would disgrace him.” I observed, that the pillory does not always disgrace. And I mentioned an instance of a gentleman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3791" id="noteref-3791" epub:type="noteref">3791</a> who I thought was not dishonoured by it. JOHNSON. “Ay, but he was, Sir. He could not mouth and strut as he used to do, after having been there. People are not willing to ask a man to their tables who has stood in the pillory.”</p>
			<p>The Gentleman who had dined with us at <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3792" id="noteref-3792" epub:type="noteref">3792</a> came in. Johnson attacked the Americans with intemperate vehemence of abuse. I said something in their favour; and added, that I was always sorry when he talked on that subject. This, it seems, exasperated him; though he said nothing at the time. The cloud was charged with sulphureous vapour, which was afterwards to burst in thunder.⁠—We talked of a gentleman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3793" id="noteref-3793" epub:type="noteref">3793</a> who was running out his fortune in London; and I said, “We must get him out of it. All his friends must quarrel with him, and that will soon drive him away.” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir; we’ll send <em>you</em> to him. If your company does not drive a man out of his house, nothing will.” This was a horrible shock, for which there was no visible cause. I afterwards asked him why he had <a id="III-page-316" />said so harsh a thing. JOHNSON. “Because, Sir, you made me angry about the Americans.” BOSWELL. “But why did you not take your revenge directly?” JOHNSON. (smiling) “Because, Sir, I had nothing ready. A man cannot strike till he has his weapons.” This was a candid and pleasant confession.</p>
			<p>He showed me tonight his drawing-room, very genteelly fitted up; and said, “<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale sneered when I talked of my having asked you and your lady to live at my house.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3794" id="noteref-3794" epub:type="noteref">3794</a> I was obliged to tell her, that you would be in as respectable a situation in my house as in hers. Sir, the insolence of wealth will creep out.” BOSWELL. “She has a little both of the insolence of wealth, and the conceit of parts.” JOHNSON. “The insolence of wealth is a wretched thing; but the conceit of parts has some foundation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3795" id="noteref-3795" epub:type="noteref">3795</a> To be sure it should not be. But who is without it?” BOSWELL. “Yourself, Sir.” JOHNSON. “Why I play no tricks: I lay no traps.” BOSWELL. “No, Sir. You are six feet high, and you only do not stoop.”</p>
			<p>We talked of the numbers of people that sometimes have composed the household of great families. I mentioned that there were a hundred in the family of the present Earl of Eglintoune’s father. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson seeming to doubt it, I began to enumerate. “Let us see: my Lord and my Lady two.” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, if you are to count by twos, you may be long enough.” BOSWELL. “Well, but now I add two sons and seven daughters, and a servant for each, that will make twenty; so we have the fifth part already.” JOHNSON. “Very true. You get at twenty pretty readily; but you will not so easily get further on. We grow to five feet pretty readily; but it is not so easy to grow to seven.”</p>
			<p>On Sunday, April 19, being Easter-day, after the solemnities of the festival in <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s Church, I visited him, but could not stay to dinner. I expressed a wish to have the arguments for Christianity always in readiness, that my religious faith might be as firm and clear as any proposition whatever, so that I need not be under the least uneasiness, when it should be attacked. JOHNSON. “Sir, you cannot answer all objections. You have demonstration for a First Cause: you see he must be good as <a id="III-page-317" />well as powerful, because there is nothing to make him otherwise, and goodness of itself is preferable. Yet you have against this, what is very certain, the unhappiness of human life. This, however, gives us reason to hope for a future state of compensation, that there may be a perfect system. But of that we were not sure, till we had a positive revelation.” I told him, that his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rasselas</i> had often made me unhappy; for it represented the misery of human life so well, and so convincingly to a thinking mind, that if at any time the impression wore off, and I felt myself easy, I began to suspect some delusion.</p>
			<p>On Monday, April 20,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3796" id="noteref-3796" epub:type="noteref">3796</a> I found him at home in the morning. We talked of a gentleman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3797" id="noteref-3797" epub:type="noteref">3797</a> who we apprehended was gradually involving his circumstances by bad management. JOHNSON. “Wasting a fortune is evaporation by a thousand imperceptible means. If it were a stream, they’d stop it. You must speak to him. It is really miserable. Were he a gamester, it could be said he had hopes of winning. Were he a bankrupt in trade, he might have grown rich; but he has neither spirit to spend nor resolution to spare. He does not spend fast enough to have pleasure from it. He has the crime of prodigality, and the wretchedness of parsimony. If a man is killed in a duel, he is killed as many a one has been killed; but it is a sad thing for a man to lie down and die; to bleed to death, because he has not fortitude enough to sear the wound, or even to stitch it up.” I cannot but pause a moment to admire the fecundity of fancy, and choice of language, which in this instance, and, indeed, on almost all occasions, he displayed. It was well observed by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy, now Bishop of Dromore, “The conversation of Johnson is strong and clear, and may be compared to an antique statue, where every vein and muscle is distinct and bold. Ordinary conversation resembles an inferior cast.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-318">On Saturday, April 25, I dined with him at Sir Joshua Reynolds’s, with the learned <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Musgrave,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3798" id="noteref-3798" epub:type="noteref">3798</a> Counsellor Leland of Ireland, son to the historian, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cholmondeley, and some more ladies. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Project</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3799" id="noteref-3799" epub:type="noteref">3799</a> a new poem, was read to the company by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Musgrave. JOHNSON. “Sir, it has no power. Were it not for the well-known names with which it is filled, it would be nothing: the names carry the poet, not the poet the names.” MUSGRAVE. “A temporary poem always entertains us.” JOHNSON. “So does an account of the criminals hanged yesterday entertain us.”</p>
			<p>He proceeded:⁠—“Demosthenes Taylor, as he was called, (that is, the Editor of Demosthenes) was the most silent man, the merest statue of a man that I have ever seen. I once dined in company with him, and all he said during the whole time was no more than <q>Richard</q>. How a man should say only Richard, it is not easy to imagine. But it was thus: <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Douglas was talking of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Zachary Grey, and ascribing to him something that was written by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Richard Grey. So, to correct him, Taylor said, (imitating his affected sententious emphasis and nod,) ‘<q>Richard</q>.’ ”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cholmondeley, in a high flow of spirits, exhibited some lively sallies of hyperbolical compliment to Johnson, with whom she had been long acquainted, and was very easy.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3800" id="noteref-3800" epub:type="noteref">3800</a> He was <a id="III-page-319" />quick in catching the <em>manner</em> of the moment, and answered her somewhat in the style of the hero of a romance, “Madam, you crown me with unfading laurels.”</p>
			<p>I happened, I know not how, to say that a pamphlet meant a prose piece. JOHNSON. “No, Sir. A few sheets of poetry unbound are a pamphlet,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3801" id="noteref-3801" epub:type="noteref">3801</a> as much as a few sheets of prose.” MUSGRAVE. “A pamphlet may be understood to mean a poetical piece in Westminster-Hall, that is, in formal language; but in common language it is understood to mean prose.” JOHNSON. (and here was one of the many instances of his knowing clearly and telling exactly how a thing is) “A pamphlet is understood in common language to mean prose, only from this, that there is so much more prose written than poetry; as when we say a <em>book</em>, prose is understood for the same reason, though a book may as well be in poetry as in prose. We understand what is most general, and we name what is less frequent.”</p>
			<p>We talked of a lady’s verses on Ireland. MISS REYNOLDS. “Have you seen them, Sir?” JOHNSON. “No, Madam. I have seen a translation from Horace, by one of her daughters. She showed it me.” MISS REYNOLDS. “And how was it, Sir?” JOHNSON. “Why, very well for a young Miss’s verses;⁠—that <a id="III-page-320" />is to say, compared with excellence, nothing; but, very well, for the person who wrote them. I am vexed at being shown verses in that manner.” MISS REYNOLDS. “But if they should be good, why not give them hearty praise?” JOHNSON. “Why, Madam, because I have not then got the better of my bad humour from having been shown them. You must consider, Madam; beforehand they may be bad, as well as good. Nobody has a right to put another under such a difficulty, that he must either hurt the person by telling the truth, or hurt himself by telling what is not true.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3802" id="noteref-3802" epub:type="noteref">3802</a> BOSWELL. “A man often shows his writings to people of eminence, to obtain from them, either from their good-nature, or from their not being able to tell the truth firmly, a commendation, of which he may afterwards avail himself.” JOHNSON. “Very true, Sir. Therefore the man, who is asked by an author, what he thinks of his work, is put to the torture, and is not obliged to speak the truth; so that what he says is not considered as his opinion; yet he has said it, and cannot retract it; and this author, when mankind are hunting him with a cannister at his tail, can say, ‘I would not have published, had not Johnson, or Reynolds, or Musgrave, or some other good judge commended the work.’ Yet I consider it as a very difficult question in conscience, whether one should advise a man not to publish a work, if profit be his object; for the man may say, ‘Had it not been for you, I should have had the money.’ Now you cannot be sure; for you have only your own opinion, and the public may think very differently.” SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS. “You must upon such an occasion have two judgments; one as to the real value of the work, the other as to what may please the general taste at the time.” JOHNSON. “But you can be sure of neither; and therefore I should scruple much to give a suppressive vote. Both Goldsmith’s comedies were once refused; his first by Garrick,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3803" id="noteref-3803" epub:type="noteref">3803</a> his second by Colman, <a id="III-page-321" />who was prevailed on at last by much solicitation, nay, a kind of force, to bring it on.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3804" id="noteref-3804" epub:type="noteref">3804</a> His <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Vicar of Wakefield</i> I myself did not think would have had much success. It was written and sold to a bookseller before his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Traveller</i>; but published after; so little expectation had the bookseller from it. Had it been sold after the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Traveller</i>, he might have had twice as much money for it, though sixty guineas was no mean price. The bookseller had the advantage of Goldsmith’s reputation from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Traveller</i> in the sale, though Goldsmith had it not in selling the copy.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3805" id="noteref-3805" epub:type="noteref">3805</a> SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS. “<i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">The Beggar’s Opera</i> affords a proof how strangely people will differ in opinion about a literary performance. Burke thinks it has no merit.” JOHNSON. “It was refused by one of the houses;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3806" id="noteref-3806" epub:type="noteref">3806</a> but I should have thought it would succeed, not from any great excellence in the writing, but from the novelty, and the general spirit and gaiety of the piece, which keeps the audience always attentive, and dismisses them in good humour.”</p>
			<p>We went to the drawing-room, where was a considerable increase of company. Several of us got round <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, and complained that he would not give us an exact catalogue of his works, that there might be a complete edition. He smiled, and evaded our entreaties. That he intended to do it, I have no doubt, because I have heard him say so; and I have in my possession an imperfect list, fairly written out, which he entitles <i xml:lang="la">Historia Studiorum</i>. I once got from one of his friends a list, which there was pretty good reason to suppose was accurate, for it was written down in his presence by this friend, who enumerated each article aloud, and had some of them mentioned to him by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Levett, in concert with whom it was made out; and Johnson, who heard all this, did not contradict it. But when I showed a copy of this list to him, and mentioned the evidence for its exactness, he laughed, and said, “I was willing to let them go on as they pleased, and never interfered.” Upon which I read it to him, article by article, <a id="III-page-322" />and got him positively to own or refuse; and then, having obtained certainty so far, I got some other articles confirmed by him directly; and afterwards, from time to time, made additions under his sanction.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3807" id="noteref-3807" epub:type="noteref">3807</a></p>
			<p>His friend Edward Cave having been mentioned, he told us, “Cave used to sell ten thousand of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Gentleman’s Magazine</i>; yet such was then his minute attention and anxiety that the sale should not suffer the smallest decrease, that he would name a particular person who he heard had talked of leaving off the Gentleman's Magazine, and would say, “Let us have something good next month.”</p>
			<p>It was observed, that avarice was inherent in some dispositions. JOHNSON. “No man was born a miser, because no man was born to possession. Every man is born <i xml:lang="la">cupidus</i>⁠—desirous of getting; but not <i xml:lang="la">avarus</i>⁠—desirous of keeping.” BOSWELL. “I have heard old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheridan maintain, with much ingenuity, that a complete miser is a happy man; a miser who gives himself wholly to the one passion of saving.” JOHNSON. “That is flying in the face of all the world, who have called an avaricious man a <em>miser</em>, because he is miserable.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3808" id="noteref-3808" epub:type="noteref">3808</a> No, Sir; a man who both spends and saves money is the happiest man, because he has both enjoyments.”</p>
			<p>The conversation having turned on <i>Bon-Mots</i>, he quoted, from one of the <i>Ana</i>, an exquisite instance of flattery in a maid of honour in France, who being asked by the Queen what o’clock it was, answered, “What your Majesty pleases.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3809" id="noteref-3809" epub:type="noteref">3809</a>” He admitted that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burke’s classical pun upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes’s being carried on the shoulders of the mob⁠—</p>
			<p id="III-page-323">“… Numerisque fertur<br/>
			Lege solutus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3810" id="noteref-3810" epub:type="noteref">3810</a>”</p>
			<p>was admirable; and though he was strangely unwilling to allow to that extraordinary man the talent of wit,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3811" id="noteref-3811" epub:type="noteref">3811</a> he also laughed with approbation at another of his playful conceits; which was, that “Horace has in one line given a description of a good desirable manour:⁠—</p>
			<p>‘Est modus in rebus, sunt certi denique fines;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3812" id="noteref-3812" epub:type="noteref">3812</a>’</p>
			<p>that is to say, a <i>modus</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3813" id="noteref-3813" epub:type="noteref">3813</a> as to the tithes and certain <em>fines</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3814" id="noteref-3814" epub:type="noteref">3814</a>”</p>
			<p>He observed, “A man cannot with propriety speak of himself, except he relates simple facts; as, ‘I was at Richmond:’ or what depends on mensuration; as, ‘I am six feet high.’ He is sure he has been at Richmond; he is sure he is six feet high: but he cannot be sure he is wise, or that he has any other excellence. Then, all censure of a man’s self is oblique praise. It is <a id="III-page-324" />in order to show how much he can spare. It has all the invidiousness of self-praise, and all the reproach of falsehood.” BOSWELL. “Sometimes it may proceed from a man’s strong consciousness of his faults being observed. He knows that others would throw him down, and therefore he had better lye down softly of his own accord.”</p>
			<p>On Tuesday, April 28, he was engaged to dine at General Paoli’s, where, as I have already observed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3815" id="noteref-3815" epub:type="noteref">3815</a> I was still entertained in elegant hospitality, and with all the ease and comfort of a home. I called on him, and accompanied him in a hackney-coach. We stopped first at the bottom of Hedge-lane, into which he went to leave a letter, “with good news for a poor man in distress,” as he told me.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3816" id="noteref-3816" epub:type="noteref">3816</a> I did not question him particularly as to this. He himself often resembled Lady Bolingbroke’s lively description of Pope; that “he was <i xml:lang="fr">un politique aux choux et aux raves</i>.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3817" id="noteref-3817" epub:type="noteref">3817</a>” He would say, “I dine today in Grosvenor-square;” this might be with a Duke<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3818" id="noteref-3818" epub:type="noteref">3818</a>: or, perhaps, “I dine today at the other end of the town:” or, “A gentleman of great eminence called on me yesterday.” He loved thus to keep things floating in conjecture: <i xml:lang="la">Omne ignotum pro magnifico est</i>..<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3819" id="noteref-3819" epub:type="noteref">3819</a> I believe I ventured to dissipate the cloud, to unveil the <a id="III-page-325" />mystery, more freely and frequently than any of his friends. We stopped again at Wirgman’s, the well-known <em>toyshop</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3820" id="noteref-3820" epub:type="noteref">3820</a> in <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s-street, at the corner of <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s-place, to which he had been directed, but not clearly, for he searched about some time, and could not find it at first; and said, “To direct one only to a corner shop is <em>toying</em> with one.” I suppose he meant this as a play upon the word <q>toy</q>: it was the first time that I knew him stoop to such sport.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3821" id="noteref-3821" epub:type="noteref">3821</a> After he had been some time in the shop, he sent for me to come out of the coach, and help him to choose a pair of silver buckles, as those he had were too small. Probably this alteration in dress had been suggested by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale, by associating with whom, his external appearance was much improved. He got better clothes; and the dark colour, from which he never deviated, was enlivened by metal buttons. His wigs, too, were much better; and during their travels in France, he was furnished with a Paris-made wig, of handsome construction.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3822" id="noteref-3822" epub:type="noteref">3822</a> This choosing of silver buckles was a negotiation: “Sir (said he), I will not have the ridiculous large ones now in fashion; and I will give no more than a guinea for a pair.” Such were the <em>principles</em> of the business; and, after some examination, he was fitted. As we drove along, I found him in a talking humour, of which I availed myself. BOSWELL. “I was this morning in Ridley’s shop, Sir; and was told, that the collection called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Johnsoniana</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3823" id="noteref-3823" epub:type="noteref">3823</a> has sold very much.” JOHNSON. “Yet the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey to the Hebrides</i> has not had a great sale.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3824" id="noteref-3824" epub:type="noteref">3824</a>” BOSWELL. “That is strange.” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir; for in that book I have told the world a great deal that they did not know before.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-326">BOSWELL. “I drank chocolate, Sir, this morning with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Eld; and, to my no small surprise, found him to be a <em>Staffordshire Whig</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3825" id="noteref-3825" epub:type="noteref">3825</a> a being which I did not believe had existed.” JOHNSON. “Sir, there are rascals in all countries.” BOSWELL. “Eld said, a Tory was a creature generated between a non-juring parson and one’s grandmother.” JOHNSON. “And I have always said, the first Whig was the Devil.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3826" id="noteref-3826" epub:type="noteref">3826</a>” BOSWELL. “He certainly was, Sir. The Devil was impatient of subordination; he was the first who resisted power:⁠—</p>
			<p>‘Better to reign in Hell, than serve in Heaven.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3827" id="noteref-3827" epub:type="noteref">3827</a>’ ”</p>
			<p>At General Paoli’s were Sir Joshua Reynolds, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton, Marchese Gherardi of Lombardy, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Spottiswoode the younger, of Spottiswoode,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3828" id="noteref-3828" epub:type="noteref">3828</a> the solicitor. At this time fears of an invasion were circulated; to obviate which, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spottiswoode observed, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fraser the engineer, who had lately come from Dunkirk, said, that the French had the same fears of us. JOHNSON. “It is thus that mutual cowardice keeps us in peace. Were one half of mankind brave, and one half cowards, the brave would be always beating the cowards. Were all brave, they would lead a very uneasy life; all would be continually fighting: but being all cowards, we go on very well.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3829" id="noteref-3829" epub:type="noteref">3829</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-327">We talked of drinking wine. JOHNSON. “I require wine, only when I am alone. I have then often wished for it, and often taken it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3830" id="noteref-3830" epub:type="noteref">3830</a>” SPOTTISWOODE. “What, by way of a companion, Sir?” JOHNSON. “To get rid of myself, to send myself away. Wine gives great pleasure; and every pleasure is of itself a good. It is a good, unless counterbalanced by evil. A man may have a strong reason not to drink wine; and that may be greater than the pleasure. Wine makes a man better pleased with himself. I do not say that it makes him more pleasing to others. Sometimes it does. But the danger is, that while a man grows better pleased with himself, he may be growing less pleasing to others.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3831" id="noteref-3831" epub:type="noteref">3831</a> Wine gives a man nothing. It neither gives him knowledge nor wit; it only animates a man, and enables him to bring out what a dread of the company has repressed. It only puts in motion what has been locked up in frost. But this may be good, or it may be bad.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3832" id="noteref-3832" epub:type="noteref">3832</a>” SPOTTISWOODE. “So, Sir, wine is a key which opens a box; but this box may be either full or empty.” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, conversation is the key: wine is a pick-lock, which forces open the box and injures it. A man should cultivate his mind so as to have that confidence and readiness without wine, which wine gives.” BOSWELL. “The great difficulty of resisting wine is from benevolence. For instance, a good worthy man asks you to taste his wine, which he has had twenty years in his cellar.” JOHNSON. “Sir, all this notion about benevolence arises from a man’s imagining himself to be of more importance to <a id="III-page-328" />others, than he really is. They don’t care a farthing whether he drinks wine or not.” SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS. “Yes, they do for the time.” JOHNSON. “For the time!⁠—If they care this minute, they forget it the next. And as for the good worthy man; how do you know he is good and worthy? No good and worthy man will insist upon another man’s drinking wine. As to the wine twenty years in the cellar⁠—of ten men, three say this, merely because they must say something;⁠—three are telling a lie, when they say they have had the wine twenty years;⁠—three would rather save the wine;⁠—one, perhaps, cares. I allow it is something to please one’s company: and people are always pleased with those who partake pleasure with them. But after a man has brought himself to relinquish the great personal pleasure which arises from drinking wine, any other consideration is a trifle. To please others by drinking wine, is something only, if there be nothing against it. I should, however, be sorry to offend worthy men:⁠—</p>
			<p>‘Curst be the verse, how well so e’er it flow,<br/>
			That tends to make one worthy man my foe.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3833" id="noteref-3833" epub:type="noteref">3833</a>’ ”</p>
			<p>BOSWELL. “Curst be the <em>spring</em>, the <em>water</em>.” JOHNSON. “But let us consider what a sad thing it would be, if we were obliged to drink or do anything else that may happen to be agreeable to the company where we are.” LANGTON. “By the same rule you must join with a gang of cutpurses.” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir: but yet we must do justice to wine; we must allow it the power it possesses. To make a man pleased with himself, let me tell you, is doing a very great thing;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3834" id="noteref-3834" epub:type="noteref">3834</a></p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="la">Si patriae volumus, si Nobis vivere cari.</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3835" id="noteref-3835" epub:type="noteref">3835</a>” ’</p>
			<p>I was at this time myself a water-drinker, upon trial, by Johnson’s recommendation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3836" id="noteref-3836" epub:type="noteref">3836</a> JOHNSON. “Boswell is a bolder combatant than Sir Joshua: he argues for wine without the help of wine; but Sir Joshua with it.” SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS. <a id="III-page-329" />“But to please one’s company is a strong motive.” JOHNSON. (who, from drinking only water, supposed everybody who drank wine to be elevated,) “I won’t argue any more with you, Sir. You are too far gone.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3837" id="noteref-3837" epub:type="noteref">3837</a>” SIR JOSHUA. “I should have thought so indeed, Sir, had I made such a speech as you have now done.” JOHNSON (drawing himself in, and, I really thought blushing,) “Nay, don’t be angry. I did not mean to offend you.” SIR JOSHUA. “At first the taste of wine was disagreeable to me; but I brought myself to drink it, that I might be like other people. The pleasure of drinking wine is so connected with pleasing your company, that altogether there is something of social goodness in it.” JOHNSON. “Sir, this is only saying the same thing over again.” SIR JOSHUA. “No, this is new.” JOHNSON. “You put it in new words, but it is an old thought. This is one of the disadvantages of wine. It makes a man mistake words for thoughts.” BOSWELL. “I think it is a new thought; at least, it is in a new <em>attitude</em>.” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, it is only in a new coat; or an old coat with a new facing. (Then laughing heartily) It is the old dog in a new doublet.⁠—An extraordinary instance however may occur where a man’s patron will do nothing for him, unless he will drink: <em>there</em> may be a good reason for drinking.”</p>
			<p>I mentioned a nobleman,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3838" id="noteref-3838" epub:type="noteref">3838</a> who I believed was really uneasy if his company would not drink hard. JOHNSON. “That is from having had people about him whom he has been accustomed to command.” BOSWELL. “Supposing I should be <i>tête-à-tête</i> with him at table.” JOHNSON. “Sir, there is no more reason for your drinking with <em>him</em>, than his being sober with <em>you</em>.” BOSWELL. “Why that is true; for it would do him less hurt to be sober, than it would do me to get drunk.” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir; and from what I have heard of him, one would not wish to sacrifice himself to such a man. If he must always have somebody to drink with him, he should buy a slave, and then he would be sure to have it. They who submit to drink as another pleases, make themselves his slaves.” BOSWELL. “But, Sir, you will surely make allowance for the duty of <a id="III-page-330" />hospitality. A gentleman who loves drinking, comes to visit me.” JOHNSON. “Sir, a man knows whom he visits; he comes to the table of a sober man.” BOSWELL. “But, Sir, you and I should not have been so well received in the Highlands and Hebrides, if I had not drunk with our worthy friends. Had I drunk water only as you did, they would not have been so cordial.” JOHNSON. “Sir William Temple mentions that in his travels through the Netherlands he had two or three gentlemen with him; and when a bumper was necessary, he put it on <em>them</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3839" id="noteref-3839" epub:type="noteref">3839</a> Were I to travel again through the islands, I would have Sir Joshua with me to take the bumpers.” BOSWELL. “But, Sir, let me put a case. Suppose Sir Joshua should take a jaunt into Scotland; he does me the honour to pay me a visit at my house in the country; I am overjoyed at seeing him; we are quite by ourselves, shall I unsociably and churlishly let him sit drinking by himself? No, no, my dear Sir Joshua, you shall not be treated so, I <em>will</em> take a bottle with you.”</p>
			<p>The celebrated <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rudd being mentioned. JOHNSON. “Fifteen years ago I should have gone to see her.” SPOTTISWOODE. “Because she was fifteen years younger?” JOHNSON. “No, Sir; but now they have a trick of putting everything into the newspapers.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3840" id="noteref-3840" epub:type="noteref">3840</a>”</p>
			<p>He begged of General Paoli to repeat one of the introductory stanzas of the first book of Tasso’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Jerusalem</i>, which he did, and then Johnson found fault with the simile of sweetening the edges of a cup for a child, being transferred from Lucretius into an epic poem.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3841" id="noteref-3841" epub:type="noteref">3841</a> The General said he did not imagine Homer’s poetry <a id="III-page-331" />was so ancient as is supposed, because he ascribes to a Greek colony circumstances of refinement not found in Greece itself at a later period, when Thucydides wrote. JOHNSON. “I recollect but one passage quoted by Thucydides from Homer, which is not to be found in our copies of Homer’s works; I am for the antiquity of Homer, and think that a Grecian colony, by being nearer Persia, might be more refined than the mother country.”</p>
			<p>On Wednesday, April 29, I dined with him at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allan Ramsay’s, where were Lord Binning, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Robertson the historian, Sir Joshua Reynolds, and the Honourable <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boscawen, widow of the Admiral, and mother of the present Viscount Falmouth; of whom, if it be not presumptuous in me to praise her, I would say, that her manners are the most agreeable, and her conversation the best, of any lady with whom I ever had the happiness to be acquainted. Before Johnson came we talked a good deal of him; Ramsay said he had always found him a very polite man, and that he treated him with great respect, which he did very sincerely. I said I worshipped him. ROBERTSON. “But some of you spoil him; you should not worship him; you should worship no man.” BOSWELL. “I cannot help worshipping him, he is so much superior to other men.” ROBERTSON. “In criticism, and in wit in conversation, he is no doubt very excellent; but in other respects he is not above other men; he will believe anything,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3842" id="noteref-3842" epub:type="noteref">3842</a> and will strenuously defend the most minute circumstance connected with the Church of England.” BOSWELL. “Believe me, Doctor, you are much mistaken as to this; for when you talk with him calmly in private,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3843" id="noteref-3843" epub:type="noteref">3843</a> he is very liberal in his way of thinking.” ROBERTSON. “He and I have been always very gracious;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3844" id="noteref-3844" epub:type="noteref">3844</a> the first time I met him was one evening at Strahan’s, when he had just had an unlucky altercation with Adam Smith,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3845" id="noteref-3845" epub:type="noteref">3845</a> to whom he had been so rough, that Strahan, <a id="III-page-332" />after Smith was gone, had remonstrated with him, and told him that I was coming soon, and that he was uneasy to think that he might behave in the same manner to me. ‘No, no, Sir, (said Johnson) I warrant you Robertson and I shall do very well.’ Accordingly he was gentle and good-humoured, and courteous with me the whole evening; and he has been so upon every occasion that we have met since. I have often said (laughing) that I have been in a great measure indebted to Smith for my good reception.” BOSWELL. “His power of reasoning is very strong, and he has a peculiar art of drawing characters, which is as rare as good portrait painting.” SIR JOSHUA REYNOLDS. “He is undoubtedly admirable in this; but, in order to mark the characters which he draws, he overcharges them, and gives people more than they really have, whether of good or bad.”</p>
			<p>No sooner did he, of whom we had been thus talking so easily, arrive, than we were all as quiet as a school upon the entrance of the headmaster;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3846" id="noteref-3846" epub:type="noteref">3846</a> and were very soon set down to a table covered with such variety of good things, as contributed not a little to dispose him to be pleased.</p>
			<p>RAMSAY. “I am old enough to have been a contemporary of Pope. His poetry was highly admired in his lifetime, more a great deal than after his death.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3847" id="noteref-3847" epub:type="noteref">3847</a>” JOHNSON. “Sir, it has not been less admired since his death; no authors ever had so much fame in their own lifetime as Pope and Voltaire; and Pope’s poetry has been as much admired since his death as during his life; it has only not been as much talked of, but that is owing to its being now more distant, and people having other writings to talk of. Virgil is less talked of than Pope, and Homer is less talked of than Virgil; but they are not less admired. We must read what the world reads at the moment. It has been maintained that this superfoetation, this teeming of the press in modern times, is prejudicial to good literature, because it obliges us to read so much of what is of inferior value, in order to be in the fashion; so that better works are neglected for want of time, because a man will have more gratification of his vanity in conversation, from having read modern books, than from having read the best works of antiquity. But it must be considered, <a id="III-page-333" />that we have now more knowledge generally diffused; all our ladies read now, which is a great extension.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3848" id="noteref-3848" epub:type="noteref">3848</a> Modern writers are the moons of literature; they shine with reflected light, with light borrowed from the ancients. Greece appears to me to be the fountain of knowledge; Rome of elegance.” RAMSAY. “I suppose Homer’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Iliad</i> to be a collection of pieces which had been written before his time. I should like to see a translation of it in poetical prose like the book of Ruth or Job.” ROBERTSON. “Would you, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, who are master of the English language, but try your hand upon a part of it.” JOHNSON. “Sir, you could not read it without the pleasure of verse.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3849" id="noteref-3849" epub:type="noteref">3849</a>”</p>
			<p>We talked of antiquarian researches. JOHNSON. “All that is really <em>known</em> of the ancient state of Britain is contained in a few pages. We <em>can</em> know no more than what the old writers have told us; yet what large books have we upon it, the whole of which, excepting such parts as are taken from those old writers, is all a dream, such as Whitaker’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Manchester</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3850" id="noteref-3850" epub:type="noteref">3850</a> I have heard Henry’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Britain</i> well spoken of: I am told it is carried on in separate divisions, as the civil, the military, the religious history: I wish much to have one branch well done, and that is the history of manners, of common life.” ROBERTSON. “Henry should have applied his attention to that alone, which is enough for any man; and he might have found a great deal scattered in various books, had he read solely with that view. Henry erred in not selling his first volume at a moderate price to the <a id="III-page-334" />booksellers, that they might have pushed him on till he had got reputation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3851" id="noteref-3851" epub:type="noteref">3851</a> I sold my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Scotland</i> at a moderate price,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3852" id="noteref-3852" epub:type="noteref">3852</a> as a work by which the booksellers might either gain or not; and Cadell has told me that Millar and he have got six thousand pounds by it. I afterwards received a much higher price for my writings. An author should sell his first work for what the booksellers will give, till it shall appear whether he is an author of merit, or, which is the same thing as to purchase-money, an author who pleases the public.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Robertson expatiated on the character of a certain nobleman;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3853" id="noteref-3853" epub:type="noteref">3853</a> that he was one of the strongest-minded men that ever lived; that he would sit in company quite sluggish, while there was nothing to call forth his intellectual vigour; but the moment that any important subject was started, for instance, how this country is to be defended against a French invasion, he would rouse himself, and show his extraordinary talents with the most powerful ability and animation. JOHNSON. “Yet this man cut his own throat. The true strong and sound mind is the mind that can embrace equally great things and small. Now I am told the King of Prussia will say to a servant, ‘Bring me a bottle of such a wine, which came in such a year; it lies in such a corner of the cellars.’ I would have a man great in great things, and elegant in little things.” He said to me afterwards, <a id="III-page-335" />when we were by ourselves, “Robertson was in a mighty romantic humour,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3854" id="noteref-3854" epub:type="noteref">3854</a> he talked of one whom he did not know; but I <em>downed</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3855" id="noteref-3855" epub:type="noteref">3855</a> him with the King of Prussia.” “Yes, Sir, (said I,) you threw a <em>bottle</em> at his head.”</p>
			<p>An ingenious gentleman was mentioned, concerning whom both Robertson and Ramsay agreed that he had a constant firmness of mind; for after a laborious day, and amidst a multiplicity of cares and anxieties, he would sit down with his sisters and be quite cheerful and good-humoured. Such a disposition, it was observed, was a happy gift of nature. JOHNSON. “I do not think so; a man has from nature a certain portion of mind; the use he makes of it depends upon his own free will. That a man has always the same firmness of mind I do not say; because every man feels his mind less firm at one time than another; but I think a man’s being in a good or bad humour depends upon his will.” I, however, could not help thinking that a man’s humour is often uncontroulable by his will.</p>
			<p>Johnson harangued against drinking wine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3856" id="noteref-3856" epub:type="noteref">3856</a> “A man (said he) may choose whether he will have abstemiousness and knowledge, or claret and ignorance.” <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Robertson, (who is very companionable,) was beginning to dissent as to the proscription of claret.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3857" id="noteref-3857" epub:type="noteref">3857</a> JOHNSON: (with a placid smile.) “Nay, Sir, you <a id="III-page-336" />shall not differ with me; as I have said that the man is most perfect who takes in the most things, I am for knowledge and claret.” ROBERTSON: (holding a glass of generous claret in his hand.) “Sir, I can only drink your health.” JOHNSON. “Sir, I should be sorry if <em>you</em> should be ever in such a state as to be able to do nothing more.” ROBERTSON. “<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, allow me to say, that in one respect I have the advantage of you; when you were in Scotland you would not come to hear any of our preachers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3858" id="noteref-3858" epub:type="noteref">3858</a> whereas, when I am here, I attend your public worship without scruple, and indeed, with great satisfaction.” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, that is not so extraordinary: the King of Siam sent ambassadors to Louis the Fourteenth; but Louis the Fourteenth sent none to the King of Siam.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3859" id="noteref-3859" epub:type="noteref">3859</a>”</p>
			<p>Here my friend for once discovered a want of knowledge or forgetfulness; for Louis the Fourteenth did send an embassy to the King of Siam, and the Abbé Choisi, who was employed in it, published an account of it in two volumes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3860" id="noteref-3860" epub:type="noteref">3860</a></p>
			<p>Next day, Thursday, April 30, I found him at home by himself. JOHNSON. “Well, Sir, Ramsay gave us a splendid dinner. I love Ramsay. You will not find a man in whose conversation there is more instruction, more information, and more elegance, than in Ramsay’s.” BOSWELL. “What I admire in Ramsay, is his continuing to be so young.” JOHNSON. “Why, yes, Sir, it is to be admired. I value myself upon this, that there is nothing of the old man in my conversation. I am now sixty-eight, and I have no more of it than at twenty-eight.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3861" id="noteref-3861" epub:type="noteref">3861</a>” <a id="III-page-337" />BOSWELL. “But, Sir, would not you wish to know old age? He who is never an old man, does not know the whole of human life; for old age is one of the divisions of it.” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, what talk is this?” BOSWELL. “I mean, Sir, the Sphinx’s description of it;⁠—morning, noon, and night. I would know night, as well as morning and noon.” JOHNSON. “What, Sir, would you know what it is to feel the evils of old age? Would you have the gout? Would you have decrepitude?”⁠—Seeing him heated, I would not argue any farther; but I was confident that I was in the right. I would, in due time, be a Nestor, an elder of the people; and there <em>should</em> be some difference between the conversation of twenty-eight and sixty-eight. A grave picture should not be gay. There is a serene, solemn, placid old age. JOHNSON. “<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale’s mother said of me what flattered me much. A clergyman was complaining of want of society in the country where he lived; and said, ‘They talk of <q>runts</q>;’ (that is, young cows). ‘Sir, (said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Salusbury,) <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Johnson would learn to talk of runts:’ meaning that I was a man who would make the most of my situation, whatever it was.” He added, “I think myself a very polite man.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3862" id="noteref-3862" epub:type="noteref">3862</a>”</p>
			<p>On Saturday, May 2, I dined with him at Sir Joshua Reynolds’s, where there was a very large company, and a great deal of conversation; but owing to some circumstance which I cannot now recollect, I have no record of any part of it, except that there were several people there by no means of the Johnsonian school; so that less attention was paid to him than usual, which put him out of humour; and upon some imaginary offence from me, he attacked me with such rudeness, that I was vexed and angry, because it gave those persons an opportunity of enlarging upon his supposed ferocity, and ill treatment of his best friends. I was so much hurt, and had my pride so much roused, that I kept away from him for a week; and, perhaps, might have kept away much longer, nay, gone to Scotland without seeing him again, had not we fortunately met and been reconciled. To such unhappy chances are human friendships liable.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3863" id="noteref-3863" epub:type="noteref">3863</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-338">On Friday, May 8, I dined with him at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton’s. I was reserved and silent, which I suppose he perceived, and might recollect the cause. After dinner when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton was called out of the room, and we were by ourselves, he drew his chair near to mine, and said, in a tone of conciliating courtesy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3864" id="noteref-3864" epub:type="noteref">3864</a> “Well, how have you done?” BOSWELL. “Sir, you have made me very uneasy by your behaviour to me when we were last at Sir Joshua Reynolds’s. You know, my dear Sir, no man has a greater respect and affection for you, or would sooner go to the end of the world to serve you. Now to treat me so⁠—.” He insisted that I had interrupted him, which I assured him was not the case; and proceeded⁠—“But why treat me so before people who neither love you nor me?” JOHNSON. “Well, I am sorry for it. I’ll make it up to you twenty different ways, as you please.” BOSWELL. “I said today to Sir Joshua, when he observed that you <em>tossed</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3865" id="noteref-3865" epub:type="noteref">3865</a> me sometimes⁠—I don’t care how often, or how high he tosses me, when only friends are present, for then I fall upon soft ground: but I do not like falling on stones, which is the case when enemies are present.⁠—I think this a pretty good image, Sir.” JOHNSON. “Sir, it is one of the happiest I have ever heard.”</p>
			<p>The truth is, there was no venom in the wounds which he inflicted at any time, unless they were irritated by some malignant infusion by other hands. We were instantly as cordial again as ever, and joined in hearty laugh at some ludicrous but innocent peculiarities of one of our friends.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3866" id="noteref-3866" epub:type="noteref">3866</a> BOSWELL. “Do you think, Sir, it is always culpable to laugh at a man to his face?” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, that depends upon the man and the thing. If it is a slight man, and a slight thing, you may; for you take nothing valuable from him.”</p>
			<p>He said, “I read yesterday <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Blair’s sermon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3867" id="noteref-3867" epub:type="noteref">3867</a> on Devotion, from the text ‘<i>Cornelius, a devout man</i>.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3868" id="noteref-3868" epub:type="noteref">3868</a> His doctrine is the best limited, the best expressed: there is the most warmth without fanaticism, the most rational transport. There is one <a id="III-page-339" />part of it which I disapprove, and I’d have him correct it; which is, that ‘he who does not feel joy in religion is far from the kingdom of heaven!’ There are many good men whose fear of GOD predominates over their love. It may discourage. It was rashly said. A noble sermon it is indeed. I wish Blair would come over to the Church of England.”</p>
			<p>When <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton returned to us, the “flow of talk” went on. An eminent author<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3869" id="noteref-3869" epub:type="noteref">3869</a> being mentioned;⁠—JOHNSON. “He is not a pleasant man. His conversation is neither instructive nor brilliant. He does not talk as if impelled by any fullness of knowledge or vivacity of imagination. His conversation is like that of any other sensible man. He talks with no wish either to inform or to hear, but only because he thinks it does not become ⸺ to sit in a company and say nothing.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton having repeated the anecdote of Addison having distinguished between his powers in conversation and in writing, by saying “I have only ninepence in my pocket; but I can draw for a thousand pounds;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3870" id="noteref-3870" epub:type="noteref">3870</a>”⁠—JOHNSON. “He had not that retort ready, Sir; he had prepared it beforehand.” LANGTON: (turning to me.) “A fine surmise. Set a thief to catch a thief.”</p>
			<p>Johnson called the East-Indians barbarians. BOSWELL. “You will except the Chinese, Sir?” JOHNSON. “No, Sir.” BOSWELL. “Have they not arts?” JOHNSON. “They have pottery.” BOSWELL. “What do you say to the written characters of their language? “JOHNSON. “Sir, they have not an alphabet. They have not been able to form what all other nations have formed.” BOSWELL. “There is more learning in their language than in any other, from the immense number of their characters.” JOHNSON. “It is only more difficult from its rudeness; as there is more labour in hewing down a tree with a stone than with an axe.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-340">He said, “I have been reading Lord Kames’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sketches of the History of Man</i>. In treating of severity of punishment, he mentions that of Madame Lapouchin, in Russia, but he does not give it fairly; for I have looked at <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Chappe D’Auteroche</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3871" id="noteref-3871" epub:type="noteref">3871</a> from whom he has taken it. He stops where it is said that the spectators thought her innocent, and leaves out what follows; that she nevertheless was guilty. Now this is being as culpable as one can conceive, to misrepresent fact in a book, and for what motive? It is like one of those lies which people tell, one cannot see why. The woman’s life was spared; and no punishment was too great for the favourite of an Empress who had conspired to dethrone her mistress.” BOSWELL. “He was only giving a picture of the lady in her sufferings.” JOHNSON. “Nay, don’t endeavour to palliate this. Guilt is a principal feature in the picture. Kames is puzzled with a question that puzzled me when I was a very young man. Why is it that the interest of money is lower, when money is plentiful; for five pounds has the same proportion of value to a hundred pounds when money is plentiful, as when it is scarce? A lady explained it to me. ‘It is (said she) because when money is plentiful there are so many more who have money to lend, that they bid down one another. Many have then a hundred pounds; and one says⁠—Take mine rather than another’s, and you shall have it at four <i>percent</i>.’ ” BOSWELL. “Does Lord Kames decide the question?” JOHNSON. “I think he leaves it as he found it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3872" id="noteref-3872" epub:type="noteref">3872</a>” BOSWELL. <a id="III-page-341" />“This must have been an extraordinary lady who instructed you, Sir. May I ask who she was?” JOHNSON. “Molly Aston,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3873" id="noteref-3873" epub:type="noteref">3873</a> Sir, the sister of those ladies with whom you dined at Lichfield.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3874" id="noteref-3874" epub:type="noteref">3874</a> I shall be at home tomorrow.” BOSWELL. “Then let us dine by ourselves at the Mitre, to keep up the old custom, ‘the custom of the manor,’ the custom of the mitre.” JOHNSON. “Sir, so it shall be.”</p>
			<p>On Saturday, May 9, we fulfilled our purpose of dining by ourselves at the Mitre, according to old custom. There was, on these occasions, a little circumstance of kind attention to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams, which must not be omitted. Before coming out, and leaving her to dine alone, he gave her choice of a chicken, a sweetbread, or any other little nice thing, which was carefully sent to her from the tavern, ready-dressed.</p>
			<p>Our conversation today, I know not how, turned, (I think for the only time at any length, during our long acquaintance,) upon the sensual intercourse between the sexes, the delight of which he ascribed chiefly to imagination. “Were it not for imagination, Sir, (said he,) a man would be as happy in the arms of a chambermaid as of a Duchess. But such is the <a id="III-page-342" />adventitious charm of fancy, that we find men who have violated the best principles of society, and ruined their fame and their fortune, that they might possess a woman of rank.” It would not be proper to record the particulars of such a conversation in moments of unreserved frankness, when nobody was present on whom it could have any hurtful effect. That subject, when philosophically treated, may surely employ the mind in as curious discussion, and as innocently, as anatomy; provided that those who do treat it keep clear of inflammatory incentives.</p>
			<p>“From grave to gay, from lively to severe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3875" id="noteref-3875" epub:type="noteref">3875</a>”⁠—we were soon engaged in very different speculation; humbly and reverently considering and wondering at the universal mystery of all things, as our imperfect faculties can now judge of them. “There are (said he) innumerable questions to which the inquisitive mind can in this state receive no answer: Why do you and I exist? Why was this world created? Since it was to be created, why was it not created sooner?”</p>
			<p>On Sunday, May 10, I supped with him at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hoole’s, with Sir Joshua Reynolds. I have neglected the memorial of this evening, so as to remember no more of it than two particulars; one, that he strenuously opposed an argument by Sir Joshua, that virtue was preferable to vice, considering this life only; and that a man would be virtuous were it only to preserve his character: and that he expressed much wonder at the curious formation of the bat, a mouse with wings; saying, that “it was almost as strange a thing in physiology, as if the fabulous dragon could be seen.”</p>
			<p>On Tuesday, May 12, I waited on the Earl of Marchmont, to know if his Lordship would favour <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson with information concerning Pope, whose Life he was about to write. Johnson had not flattered himself with the hopes of receiving any civility from this nobleman; for he said to me, when I mentioned Lord Marchmont as one who could tell him a great deal about Pope⁠—“Sir, he will tell <em>me</em> nothing.” I had the honour of being known to his Lordship, and applied to him of myself, without being commissioned by Johnson. His Lordship behaved in the <a id="III-page-343" />most polite and obliging manner, promised to tell all he recollected about Pope, and was so very courteous as to say, “Tell <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson I have a great respect for him, and am ready to show it in any way I can. I am to be in the city tomorrow, and will call at his house as I return.” His Lordship however asked, “Will he write the Lives of the Poets impartially? He was the first that brought Whig and Tory into a Dictionary.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3876" id="noteref-3876" epub:type="noteref">3876</a> And what do you think of his definition of Excise? Do you know the history of his aversion to the word <q>transpire</q><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3877" id="noteref-3877" epub:type="noteref">3877</a>?” Then taking down the folio <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i>, he showed it with this censure on its secondary sense: “To escape from secrecy to notice; a sense lately innovated from France, without necessity.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3878" id="noteref-3878" epub:type="noteref">3878</a>” The truth was Lord Bolingbroke, who left the Jacobites, first used it; therefore, it was to be condemned. “He should have shown what word would do for it, if it was unnecessary.” I afterwards put the question to Johnson: “Why, Sir, (said he,) <q>get abroad</q>.” BOSWELL. “That, Sir, is using two words.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3879" id="noteref-3879" epub:type="noteref">3879</a>” JOHNSON. “Sir, there is no end of this. You may as well insist to have a word <a id="III-page-344" />for old age.” BOSWELL. “Well, Sir, <i xml:lang="la">Senectus</i>.” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, to insist always that there should be one word to express a thing in English, because there is one in another language, is to change the language.”</p>
			<p>I availed myself of this opportunity to hear from his Lordship many particulars both of Pope and Lord Bolingbroke, which I have in writing.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3880" id="noteref-3880" epub:type="noteref">3880</a></p>
			<p>I proposed to Lord Marchmont that he should revise Johnson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Pope</i>: “So (said his Lordship) you would put me in a dangerous situation. You know he knocked down Osborne the bookseller.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3881" id="noteref-3881" epub:type="noteref">3881</a>”</p>
			<p>Elated with the success of my spontaneous exertion to procure material and respectable aid to Johnson for his very favourite work, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Lives of the Poets</i>, I hastened down to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale’s at Streatham, where he now was, that I might insure his being at home next day; and after dinner, when I thought he would receive the good news in the best humour, I announced it eagerly: “I have been at work for you today, Sir. I have been with Lord Marchmont. He bade me tell you he has a great respect for you, and will call on you tomorrow at one o’clock, and communicate all he knows about Pope.”⁠—Here I paused, in full expectation that he would be pleased with this intelligence, would praise my active merit, and would be alert to embrace such an offer from a nobleman. But whether I had shown an over-exultation, which provoked his spleen; or whether he was seized with a suspicion that I had obtruded him on Lord Marchmont, and humbled him too much; or whether there was anything more than an unlucky fit of ill-humour, I know not; but, to my surprise, the result was⁠—JOHNSON. “I shall not be in town tomorrow. I don’t care to know about Pope.” MRS. THRALE: (surprised as I was, and a little angry.) “I suppose, Sir, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boswell thought, that as you are to write <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pope’s Life</i>, you would wish to know about him.” JOHNSON. “Wish! why yes. If it rained knowledge I’d hold out my hand; but I would not give myself the trouble to go in quest of it.” There was no arguing with him at the <a id="III-page-345" />moment. Some time afterwards he said, “Lord Marchmont will call on me, and then I shall call on Lord Marchmont.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale was uneasy at his unaccountable caprice;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3882" id="noteref-3882" epub:type="noteref">3882</a> and told me, that if I did not take care to bring about a meeting between Lord Marchmont and him, it would never take place, which would be a great pity. I sent a card to his Lordship, to be left at Johnson’s house, acquainting him, that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson could not be in town next day, but would do himself the honour of waiting on him at another time. I give this account fairly, as a specimen of that unhappy temper with which this great and good man had occasionally to struggle, from something morbid in his constitution. Let the most censorious of my readers suppose himself to have a violent fit of the tooth-ach, or to have received a severe stroke on the shinbone, and when in such a state to be asked a question; and if he has any candour, he will not be surprised at the answers which Johnson sometimes gave in moments of irritation, which, let me assure them, is exquisitely painful. But it must not be erroneously supposed that he was, in the smallest degree, careless concerning any work which he undertook, or that he was generally thus peevish. It will be seen, that in the following year he had a very agreeable interview with Lord Marchmont, at his Lordship’s house;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3883" id="noteref-3883" epub:type="noteref">3883</a> and this very afternoon he soon forgot any fretfulness, and fell into conversation as usual.</p>
			<p>I mentioned a reflection having been thrown out against four Peers for having presumed to rise in opposition to the opinion of the twelve Judges, in a cause in the House of Lords,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3884" id="noteref-3884" epub:type="noteref">3884</a> as if that were indecent. JOHNSON. “Sir, there is no ground for censure. The Peers are Judges themselves; and supposing them really to be of a different opinion, they might from duty be in opposition to the Judges, who were there only to be consulted.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-346">In this observation I fully concurred with him; for, unquestionably, all the Peers are vested with the highest judicial powers; and when they are confident that they understand a cause, are not obliged, nay ought not to acquiesce in the opinion of the ordinary Law Judges, or even in that of those who from their studies and experience are called the Law Lords. I consider the Peers in general as I do a Jury, who ought to listen with respectful attention to the sages of the law; but, if after hearing them, they have a firm opinion of their own, are bound, as honest men, to decide accordingly. Nor is it so difficult for them to understand even law questions, as is generally thought; provided they will bestow sufficient attention upon them. This observation was made by my honoured relation the late Lord Cathcart, who had spent his life in camps and courts; yet assured me, that he could form a clear opinion upon most of the causes that came before the House of Lords, “as they were so well enucleated<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3885" id="noteref-3885" epub:type="noteref">3885</a> in the Cases.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale told us, that a curious clergyman of our acquaintance had discovered a licentious stanza, which Pope had originally in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Universal Prayer</i>, before the stanza,</p>
			<p>“What conscience dictates to be done,<br/>
			Or warns us<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3886" id="noteref-3886" epub:type="noteref">3886</a> not to do,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>It was thus:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Can sins of moment claim the rod<br/>
			Of everlasting fires?<br/>
			And that offend great Nature’s GOD,<br/>
			Which Nature’s self inspires<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3887" id="noteref-3887" epub:type="noteref">3887</a>?”</p>
			<p>and that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson observed, “it had been borrowed from <em>Guarini</em>.” There are, indeed, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Pastor Fido</i>, many such flimsy superficial reasonings, as that in the last two lines of this stanza. <a id="III-page-347" />BOSWELL. “In that stanza of Pope’s, ‘rod of fires’ is certainly a bad metaphor.” MRS. THRALE. “And ‘sins of <q>moment</q>’ is a faulty expression; for its true import is <q>momentous</q>, which cannot be intended.” JOHNSON. “It must have been written ‘of <q>moments</q>.’ Of <q>moment</q>, is <q>momentous</q>; of <q>moments</q>, <q>momentary</q>. I warrant you, however, Pope wrote this stanza, and some friend struck it out. Boileau wrote some such thing, and Arnaud<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3888" id="noteref-3888" epub:type="noteref">3888</a> struck it out, saying, ‘<i xml:lang="fr">Vous gagnerez deux ou trois impies, et perdrez je ne scais combien des honnettes gens.</i>’ These fellows want to say a daring thing, and don’t know how to go about it. Mere poets know no more of fundamental principles than⁠—.” Here he was interrupted somehow. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale mentioned Dryden. JOHNSON. “He puzzled himself about predestination.⁠—How foolish was it in Pope to give all his friendship to Lords, who thought they honoured him by being with him; and to choose such Lords as Burlington, and Cobham, and Bolingbroke! Bathurst was negative, a pleasing man; and I have heard no ill of Marchmont; and then always saying, ‘I do not value you for being a Lord;’ which was a sure proof that he did.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3889" id="noteref-3889" epub:type="noteref">3889</a> I never say, I do not value Boswell more for being born to an estate, because I do not care.” BOSWELL. “Nor for being a Scotchman?” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, I do value you more for being a Scotchman. You are a Scotchman without the faults of a Scotchman. You would not have been so valuable as you are, had you not been a Scotchman.”</p>
			<p>Talking of divorces, I asked if Othello’s doctrine was not plausible?</p>
			<p>“He that is robb’d, not wanting what is stolen,<br/>
			Let him not know’t, and he’s not robb’d at all.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3890" id="noteref-3890" epub:type="noteref">3890</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-348"><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale joined against this. JOHNSON. “Ask any man if he’d wish not to know of such an injury.” BOSWELL. “Would you tell your friend to make him unhappy?” JOHNSON. “Perhaps, Sir, I should not; but that would be from prudence on my own account. A man would tell his father.” BOSWELL. “Yes; because he would not have spurious children to get any share of the family inheritance.” MRS. THRALE. “Or he would tell his brother.” BOSWELL. “Certainly his <em>elder</em> brother.” JOHNSON. “You would tell your friend of a woman’s infamy, to prevent his marrying a whore: there is the same reason to tell him of his wife’s infidelity, when he is married, to prevent the consequences of imposition. It is a breach of confidence not to tell a friend.” BOSWELL. “Would you tell <abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3891" id="noteref-3891" epub:type="noteref">3891</a>?” (naming a gentleman who assuredly was not in the least danger of such a miserable disgrace, though married to a fine woman.) JOHNSON. “No, Sir; because it would do no good: he is so sluggish, he’d never go to parliament and get through a divorce.”</p>
			<p>He said of one of our friends,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3892" id="noteref-3892" epub:type="noteref">3892</a> “He is ruining himself without pleasure. A man who loses at play, or who runs out his fortune at court, makes his estate less, in hopes of making it bigger: (I am sure of this word, which was often used by him:) but it is a sad thing to pass through the quagmire of parsimony, to the gulf of ruin. To pass over the flowery path of extravagance is very well.”</p>
			<p>Amongst the numerous prints pasted<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3893" id="noteref-3893" epub:type="noteref">3893</a> on the walls of the dining-room at Streatham, was Hogarth’s “Modern Midnight Conversation.” I asked him what he knew of Parson Ford,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3894" id="noteref-3894" epub:type="noteref">3894</a> who makes a conspicuous figure in the riotous group. JOHNSON. “Sir, he was my acquaintance and relation, my mother’s nephew. He had purchased a living in the country, but not simoniacally. I never saw him but in the country. I have been told he was a man of great parts; very profligate, but I never heard he was impious.” BOSWELL. “Was there not a <a id="III-page-349" />story of his ghost having appeared?” JOHNSON. “Sir, it was believed. A waiter at the Hummums,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3895" id="noteref-3895" epub:type="noteref">3895</a> in which house Ford died, had been absent for some time, and returned, not knowing that Ford was dead. Going down to the cellar, according to the story, he met him; going down again he met him a second time. When he came up, he asked some of the people of the house what Ford could be doing there. They told him Ford was dead. The waiter took a fever, in which he lay for some time. When he recovered, he said he had a message to deliver to some women from Ford; but he was not to tell what, or to whom. He walked out; he was followed; but somewhere about <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s they lost him. He came back, and said he had delivered the message, and the women exclaimed, ‘Then we are all undone!’ <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Pellet, who was not a credulous man, inquired into the truth of this story, and he said, the evidence was irresistible. My wife went to the Hummums; (it is a place where people get themselves cupped.) I believe she went with intention to hear about this story of Ford. At first they were unwilling to tell her; but, after they had talked to her, she came away satisfied that it was true. To be sure the man had a fever; and this vision may have been the beginning of it. But if the message to the women, and their behaviour upon it, were true as related, there was something supernatural. That rests upon his word; and there it remains.”</p>
			<p>After <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale was gone to bed, Johnson and I sat up late. We resumed Sir Joshua Reynolds’s argument on the preceding Sunday, that a man would be virtuous though he had no other motive than to preserve his character. JOHNSON. “Sir, it is not true: for as to this world vice does not hurt a man’s character.” BOSWELL. “Yes, Sir, debauching a friend’s wife will.” JOHNSON. “No, Sir. Who thinks the worse of ⸺<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3896" id="noteref-3896" epub:type="noteref">3896</a> for it?” BOSWELL. “Lord ⸺<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3897" id="noteref-3897" epub:type="noteref">3897</a> was not his friend.” JOHNSON. “That is only a circumstance, Sir; a slight distinction. He could not get into the house but by Lord ⸺. A man is chosen Knight of the shire, not the less for having debauched ladies.” BOSWELL. “What, Sir, if he debauched the ladies of gentlemen in the <a id="III-page-350" />county, will not there be a general resentment against him?” JOHNSON. “No, Sir. He will lose those particular gentlemen; but the rest will not trouble their heads about it.” (warmly.) BOSWELL. “Well, Sir, I cannot think so.” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, there is no talking with a man who will dispute what everybody knows, (angrily.) Don’t you know this?” BOSWELL. “No, Sir; and I wish to think better of your country than you represent it. I knew in Scotland a gentleman obliged to leave it for debauching a lady; and in one of our counties an Earl’s brother lost his election, because he had debauched the lady of another Earl in that county, and destroyed the peace of a noble family.”</p>
			<p>Still he would not yield. He proceeded: “Will you not allow, Sir, that vice does not hurt a man’s character so as to obstruct his prosperity in life, when you know that ⸺<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3898" id="noteref-3898" epub:type="noteref">3898</a> was loaded with wealth and honours; a man who had acquired his fortune by such crimes, that his consciousness of them impelled him to cut his own throat.” BOSWELL. “You will recollect, Sir, that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Robertson said, he cut his throat because he was weary of still life; little things not being sufficient to move his great mind.” JOHNSON, (very angry.) “Nay, Sir, what stuff is this! You had no more this opinion after Robertson said it, than before. I know nothing more offensive than repeating what one knows to be foolish things, by way of continuing a dispute, to see what a man will answer⁠—to make him your butt!” (angrier still.) BOSWELL. “My dear Sir, I had no such intentions as you seem to suspect; I had not indeed. Might not this nobleman have felt everything ‘weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3899" id="noteref-3899" epub:type="noteref">3899</a>’ as Hamlet says?” JOHNSON. “Nay, if you are to bring in gabble, I’ll talk no more. I will not, upon my honour.”⁠—My readers will decide upon this dispute.</p>
			<p>Next morning I stated to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale at breakfast, before he came down, the dispute of last night as to the influence of character upon success in life. She said he was certainly wrong; and told me, that a Baronet lost an election in Wales, because he had debauched the sister of a gentleman in the county, whom he made one of his daughters invite as her companion at his seat in the country, when his lady and his other children were in London. But she would not encounter Johnson upon the subject.</p>
			<p id="III-page-351">I stayed all this day with him at Streatham. He talked a great deal, in very good humour.</p>
			<p>Looking at <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Dilly’s splendid edition of Lord Chesterfield’s miscellaneous works, he laughed, and said, “Here now are two speeches ascribed to him, both of which were written by me: and the best of it is, they have found out that one is like Demosthenes, and the other like Cicero.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3900" id="noteref-3900" epub:type="noteref">3900</a>”</p>
			<p>He censured Lord Kames’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sketches of the History of Man</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3901" id="noteref-3901" epub:type="noteref">3901</a> for misrepresenting Clarendon’s account of the appearance of Sir George Villiers’s ghost, as if Clarendon were weakly credulous; when the truth is, that Clarendon only says, that the story was upon a better foundation of credit, than usually such discourses are founded upon;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3902" id="noteref-3902" epub:type="noteref">3902</a> nay, speaks thus of the person who was reported to have seen the vision, “the poor man, <a id="III-page-352" /><em>if he had been at all waking</em>;” which Lord Kames has omitted. He added, “in this book it is maintained that virtue is natural to man, and that if we would but consult our own hearts we should be virtuous.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3903" id="noteref-3903" epub:type="noteref">3903</a> Now after consulting our own hearts all we can, and with all the helps we have, we find how few of us are virtuous. This is saying a thing which all mankind know not to be true.” BOSWELL. “Is not modesty natural?” JOHNSON. “I cannot say, Sir, as we find no people quite in a state of nature; but I think the more they are taught, the more modest they are. The French are a gross, ill-bred, untaught people; a lady there will spit on the floor and rub it with her foot.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3904" id="noteref-3904" epub:type="noteref">3904</a> What I gained by being in France was, learning to be better satisfied with my own country. Time may be employed to more advantage from nineteen to twenty-four almost in any way than in travelling; when you set travelling against mere negation, against doing nothing, it is better to be sure; but how much more would a young man improve were he to study during those years. Indeed, if a young man is wild, and must run after women and bad company, it is better this should be done abroad, as, on his return, he can break off such connections, and begin at home a new man, with a character to form, and acquaintances to make.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3905" id="noteref-3905" epub:type="noteref">3905</a> How little does travelling supply to the conversation of any man who has travelled; how little to Beauclerk!” BOSWELL. “What say you to Lord ⸺?” JOHNSON. “I never but once heard him talk of what he had seen, and that was of a large serpent in one of the Pyramids of Egypt.” BOSWELL. “Well, I happened <a id="III-page-353" />to hear him tell the same thing, which made me mention him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3906" id="noteref-3906" epub:type="noteref">3906</a>”</p>
			<p>I talked of a country life. JOHNSON. “Were I to live in the country, I would not devote myself to the acquisition of popularity; I would live in a much better way, much more happily; I would have my time at my own command.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3907" id="noteref-3907" epub:type="noteref">3907</a>” BOSWELL. “But, Sir, is it not a sad thing to be at a distance from all our literary friends?” JOHNSON. “Sir, you will by and by have enough of this conversation, which now delights you so much.” <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3908" id="noteref-3908" epub:type="noteref">3908</a></p>
			<p>As he was a zealous friend of subordination, he was at all times watchful to repress the vulgar cant against the manners of the great; <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3909" id="noteref-3909" epub:type="noteref">3909</a> High people, Sir, (said he,) are the best; take a hundred ladies of quality, you’ll find them better wives, better mothers, more willing to sacrifice their own pleasure to their children than a hundred other women. Tradeswomen (I mean the wives of tradesmen) in the city, who are worth from ten to fifteen thousand pounds, are the worst creatures upon the earth, grossly ignorant, and thinking viciousness fashionable. Farmers, I think, are often worthless fellows.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3910" id="noteref-3910" epub:type="noteref">3910</a> Few lords will cheat; and, if they do, they’ll be ashamed of it: farmers cheat and are not ashamed of it: they have all the sensual vices too of the nobility, with cheating into the bargain. There is as much fornication and adultery among farmers as amongst noblemen.” BOSWELL. “The notion of the world, Sir, however is, that the morals of women of quality are worse than those in lower stations.” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir, the licentiousness of one woman of quality makes more noise than that of a number of women in lower stations; then, Sir, you are to consider the malignity of women in the city against women of quality, which will make them believe anything of them, such as that they call their coachmen to bed. No, Sir, so far as I have observed, the higher in rank, the richer ladies are, they are the better instructed and the more virtuous.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-354">This year the Reverend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Horne published his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Letter to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dunning on the English Particle</i>; Johnson read it, and though not treated in it with sufficient respect,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3911" id="noteref-3911" epub:type="noteref">3911</a> he had candour enough to say to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Seward, “Were I to make a new edition of my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i>, I would adopt several<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3912" id="noteref-3912" epub:type="noteref">3912</a> of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Horne’s etymologies; I hope they did not put the dog in the pillory for his libel; he has too much literature for that.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3913" id="noteref-3913" epub:type="noteref">3913</a>”</p>
			<p>On Saturday, May 16, I dined with him at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beauclerk’s with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Steevens, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Higgins, and some others. I regret very feelingly every instance of my remissness in recording his <i>memorabilia</i>; I am afraid it is the condition of humanity (as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Windham, of Norfolk, once observed to me, after having made an admirable speech in the House of Commons, which was highly applauded, but which he afterwards perceived might have been better:) “that we are more uneasy <a id="III-page-355" />from thinking of our wants, than happy in thinking of our acquisitions.” This is an unreasonable mode of disturbing our tranquillity, and should be corrected; let me then comfort myself with the large treasure of Johnson’s conversation which I have preserved for my own enjoyment and that of the world, and let me exhibit what I have upon each occasion, whether more or less, whether a bulse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3914" id="noteref-3914" epub:type="noteref">3914</a> or only a few sparks of a diamond.</p>
			<p>He said, “<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Mead lived more in the broad sunshine of life than almost any man.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3915" id="noteref-3915" epub:type="noteref">3915</a>” The disaster of General Burgoyne’s army was then the common topic of conversation. It was asked why piling their arms was insisted upon as a matter of such consequence, when it seemed to be a circumstance so inconsiderable in itself.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3916" id="noteref-3916" epub:type="noteref">3916</a> JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, a French author says, ‘<i xml:lang="fr">Il y a beaucoup de puerilités dans la guerre</i>.’ All distinctions are trifles, because great things can seldom occur, and those distinctions are settled <a id="III-page-356" />by custom. A savage would as willingly have his meat sent to him in the kitchen, as eat it at the table here; as men become civilized, various modes of denoting honourable preference are invented.”</p>
			<p>He this day made the observations upon the similarity between <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rasselas</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Candide</i>, which I have inserted in its proper place,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3917" id="noteref-3917" epub:type="noteref">3917</a> when considering his admirable philosophical Romance. He said <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Candide</i> he thought had more power in it than anything that <em>Voltaire</em> had written.</p>
			<p>He said, “the lyrical part of Horace never can be perfectly translated; so much of the excellence is in the numbers and the expression. Francis has done it the best; I’ll take his, five out of six, against them all.”</p>
			<p>On Sunday, May 17, I presented to him <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fullarton, of Fullarton, who has since distinguished himself so much in India,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3918" id="noteref-3918" epub:type="noteref">3918</a> to whom he naturally talked of travels, as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brydone accompanied him in his tour to Sicily and Malta. He said, “The information which we have from modern travellers is much more authentic than what we had from ancient travellers; ancient travellers guessed; modern travellers measure.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3919" id="noteref-3919" epub:type="noteref">3919</a> The Swiss admit that there is but one error in Stanyan.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3920" id="noteref-3920" epub:type="noteref">3920</a> If Brydone were more attentive to his Bible, he would be a good traveller.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3921" id="noteref-3921" epub:type="noteref">3921</a>”</p>
			<p>He said, “Lord Chatham was a Dictator; he possessed the power of putting the State in motion; now there is no power, all order is relaxed.” BOSWELL. “Is there no hope of a change to the better?” JOHNSON. “Why, yes, Sir, when we are weary of this relaxation. So the City of London will appoint its Mayors again by seniority.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3922" id="noteref-3922" epub:type="noteref">3922</a>” BOSWELL. “But is not that taking a mere chance for having a good or a bad Mayor?” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir; but the evil of competition is greater than that of the worst Mayor that can come; besides, there is no more reason to suppose that the choice of a rabble will be right, than that chance will be right.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-357">On Tuesday, May 19, I was to set out for Scotland in the evening. He was engaged to dine with me at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly’s, I waited upon him to remind him of his appointment and attend him thither; he gave me some salutary counsel, and recommended vigorous resolution against any deviation from moral duty. BOSWELL. “But you would not have me to bind myself by a solemn obligation?” JOHNSON, (much agitated) “What! a vow⁠—O, no, Sir, a vow is a horrible thing, it is a snare for sin.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3923" id="noteref-3923" epub:type="noteref">3923</a> The man who cannot go to Heaven without a vow⁠—may go⁠—.” Here, standing erect, in the middle of his library, and rolling grand, his pause was truly a curious compound of the solemn and the ludicrous; he half-whistled in his usual way, when pleasant, and he paused, as if checked by religious awe. Methought he would have added⁠—to Hell⁠—but was restrained. I humoured the dilemma. “What! Sir, (said I,) <i xml:lang="la">In caelum jusseris ibit</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3924" id="noteref-3924" epub:type="noteref">3924</a>?” alluding to his imitation of it⁠—</p>
			<p>“And bid him go to Hell, to Hell he goes.”</p>
			<p>I had mentioned to him a slight fault in his noble <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Imitation of the Tenth Satire of Juvenal</i>, a too near recurrence of the verb <q>spread</q>, in his description of the young Enthusiast at College:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Through all his veins the fever of renown,<br/>
			<em>Spreads</em> from the strong contagion of the gown;<br/>
			O’er Bodley’s dome his future labours <em>spread</em>,<br/>
			And Bacon’s mansion trembles o’er his head.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3925" id="noteref-3925" epub:type="noteref">3925</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-358">He had desired me to change <q>spreads</q> to <q>burns</q>, but for perfect authenticity, I now had it done with his own hand.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3926" id="noteref-3926" epub:type="noteref">3926</a> I thought this alteration not only cured the fault, but was more poetical, as it might carry an allusion to the shirt by which Hercules was inflamed.</p>
			<p>We had a quiet comfortable meeting at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly’s; nobody there but ourselves. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly mentioned somebody having wished that Milton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tractate on Education</i> should be printed along with his Poems in the edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The English Poets</i> then going on. JOHNSON. “It would be breaking in upon the plan; but would be of no great consequence. So far as it would be anything, it would be wrong. Education in England has been in danger of being hurt by two of its greatest men, Milton and Locke. Milton’s plan is impracticable, and I suppose has never been tried. Locke’s, I fancy, has been tried often enough, but is very imperfect; it gives too much to one side, and too little to the other; it gives too little to literature.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3927" id="noteref-3927" epub:type="noteref">3927</a>⁠—I shall do what I can for <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Watts; but my materials are very scanty. His poems are by no means his best works; I cannot praise his poetry itself highly; but I can praise its design.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3928" id="noteref-3928" epub:type="noteref">3928</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-359">My illustrious friend and I parted with assurances of affectionate regard.</p>
			<p>I wrote to him on the 25th of May, from Thorpe in Yorkshire, one of the seats of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bosville,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3929" id="noteref-3929" epub:type="noteref">3929</a> and gave him an account of my having passed a day at Lincoln, unexpectedly, and therefore without having any letters of introduction, but that I had been honoured with civilities from the Reverend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Simpson, an acquaintance of his, and Captain Broadley, of the Lincolnshire Militia; but more particularly from the Reverend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gordon, the Chancellor, who first received me with great politeness as a stranger, and when I informed him who I was, entertained me at his house with the most flattering attention; I also expressed the pleasure with which I had found that our worthy friend Langton was highly esteemed in his own county town.</p>
			<p>“To DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, June 18, 1778.</p>
			<p>“MY DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“Since my return to Scotland, I have been again at Lanark, and have had more conversation with Thomson’s sister. It is strange that Murdoch, who was his intimate friend, should have mistaken his mother’s maiden name, which he says was Hume, whereas Hume was the name of his grandmother by the mother’s side. His mother’s name was Beatrix Trotter,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3930" id="noteref-3930" epub:type="noteref">3930</a> a daughter of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Trotter, of Fogo, a small proprietor of land. Thomson had one brother, whom he had with him in England as his amanuensis; but he was seized with a consumption, and having returned to Scotland, to try what his native air would do for him, died young. He had three sisters, one married <a id="III-page-360" />to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bell, minister of the parish of Strathaven; one to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Craig, father of the ingenious architect, who gave the plan of the New Town of Edinburgh; and one to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomson, master of the grammar-school at Lanark. He was of a humane and benevolent disposition; not only sent valuable presents to his sisters, but a yearly allowance in money, and was always wishing to have it in his power to do them more good. Lord Lyttelton’s observation, that ‘he loathed much to write,’ was very true. His letters to his sister, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thomson, were not frequent, and in one of them he says, ‘All my friends who know me, know how backward I am to write letters; and never impute the negligence of my hand to the coldness of my heart.’ I send you a copy of the last letter which she had from him;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3931" id="noteref-3931" epub:type="noteref">3931</a> she never heard that he had any intention of going into holy orders. From this late interview with his sister, I think much more favourably of him, as I hope you will. I am eager to see more of your Prefaces to the Poets; I solace myself with the few proof-sheets which I have.</p>
			<p>“I send another parcel of Lord Hailes’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annals</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3932" id="noteref-3932" epub:type="noteref">3932</a> which you will please to return to me as soon as you conveniently can. He says, ‘he wishes you would cut a little deeper;’ but he may be proud that there is so little occasion to use the critical knife. I ever am, my dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your faithful and affectionate,</p>
			<p>“humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton has been pleased, at my request, to favour me with some particulars of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s visit to Warley-camp, where this gentleman was at the time stationed as a Captain in the Lincolnshire militia.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3933" id="noteref-3933" epub:type="noteref">3933</a> I shall give them in his own words in a letter to me.</p>
			<p id="III-page-361">“It was in the summer of the year 1778,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3934" id="noteref-3934" epub:type="noteref">3934</a> that he complied with my invitation to come down to the Camp at Warley, and he stayed with me about a week; the scene appeared, notwithstanding a great degree of ill health that he seemed to labour under, to interest and amuse him, as agreeing with the disposition that I believe you know he constantly manifested towards enquiring into subjects of the military kind. He sat, with a patient degree of attention, to observe the proceedings of a regimental court-martial, that happened to be called, in the time of his stay with us; and one night, as late as at eleven o’clock, he accompanied the Major of the regiment in going what are styled the <em>Rounds</em>, where he might observe the forms of visiting the guards, for the seeing that they and their sentries are ready in their duty on their several posts. He took occasion to converse at times on military topics, one in particular, that I see the mention of, in your <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides</i>, which lies open before me,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3935" id="noteref-3935" epub:type="noteref">3935</a> as to gunpowder; which he spoke of to the same effect, in part, that you relate.</p>
			<p>“On one occasion, when the regiment were going through their exercise, he went quite close to the men at one of the extremities of it, and watched all their practices attentively; and, when he came away, his remark was, ‘The men indeed do load their muskets and fire with wonderful celerity.’ He was likewise particular in requiring to know what was the weight of the musquet balls in use, and within what distance they might be expected to take effect when fired off.</p>
			<p>“In walking among the tents, and observing the difference between those of the officers and private men, he said that the superiority of accommodation of the better conditions of life, to that of the inferior ones, was never exhibited to him in so distinct a view. The civilities paid to him in the camp were, from the gentlemen of the Lincolnshire regiment, one of the officers of which accommodated him with a tent in which he slept; and from General Hall, who very courteously invited him to dine with him, where he appeared to be very well pleased with his entertainment, and the civilities he received on the part of the <a id="III-page-362" />General;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3936" id="noteref-3936" epub:type="noteref">3936</a> the attention likewise, of the General’s aid-de-camp, Captain Smith, seemed to be very welcome to him, as appeared by their engaging in a great deal of discourse together. The gentlemen of the East York regiment likewise on being informed of his coming, solicited his company at dinner, but by that time he had fixed his departure, so that he could not comply with the invitation.”</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I have received two letters from you, of which the second complains of the neglect shown to the first. You must not tye your friends to such punctual correspondence. You have all possible assurances of my affection and esteem; and there ought to be no need of reiterated professions. When it may happen that I can give you either counsel or comfort, I hope it will never happen to me that I should neglect you; but you must not think me criminal or cold if I say nothing when I have nothing to say.</p>
			<p>“You are now happy enough. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell is recovered; and I congratulate you upon the probability of her long life. If general approbation will add anything to your enjoyment, I can tell you that I have heard you mentioned as <q>a man whom everybody likes</q>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3937" id="noteref-3937" epub:type="noteref">3937</a> I think life has little more to give.</p>
			<p>“⁠⸺<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3938" id="noteref-3938" epub:type="noteref">3938</a> has gone to his regiment. He has laid down his coach, and talks of making more contractions of his expense: how he will succeed I know not. It is difficult to reform a household gradually; it may be better done by a system totally new. I am afraid he has always something to hide. When we pressed him to go to ⸺,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3939" id="noteref-3939" epub:type="noteref">3939</a> he objected the necessity of attending his navigation;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3940" id="noteref-3940" epub:type="noteref">3940</a> yet he could talk of going to Aberdeen, a place not much nearer his navigation. I believe he cannot bear the thought of living at ⸺<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3941" id="noteref-3941" epub:type="noteref">3941</a> in a state of diminution; and of appearing among the gentlemen of the neighbourhood <a id="III-page-363" /><em>shorn of his beams</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3942" id="noteref-3942" epub:type="noteref">3942</a> This is natural, but it is cowardly. What I told him of the encreasing expense of a growing family seems to have struck him. He certainly had gone on with very confused views, and we have, I think, shown him that he is wrong; though, with the common deficiency of advisers, we have not shown him how to do right.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3943" id="noteref-3943" epub:type="noteref">3943</a></p>
			<p>“I wish you would a little correct or restrain your imagination, and imagine that happiness, such as life admits, may be had at other places as well as London. Without asserting Stoicism, it may be said, that it is our business to exempt ourselves as much as we can from the power of external things. There is but one solid basis of happiness; and that is, the reasonable hope of a happy futurity.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3944" id="noteref-3944" epub:type="noteref">3944</a> This may be had everywhere.</p>
			<p>“I do not blame your preference of London to other places, for it is really to be preferred, if the choice is free; but few have the choice of their place, or their manner of life; and mere pleasure ought not to be the prime motive of action.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale, poor thing, has a daughter.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3945" id="noteref-3945" epub:type="noteref">3945</a> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale dislikes the times,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3946" id="noteref-3946" epub:type="noteref">3946</a> like the rest of us. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams is sick; <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Desmoulins is poor. I have miserable nights. Nobody is well but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Levett.</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir, Your most, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“London, July 3, 1778.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-364">In the course of this year there was a difference between him and his friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3947" id="noteref-3947" epub:type="noteref">3947</a> the particulars of which it is unnecessary to relate. Their reconciliation was communicated to me in a letter from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan, in the following words:⁠—</p>
			<p>“The notes I showed you that passed between him and me were dated in March last. The matter lay dormant till July 27,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3948" id="noteref-3948" epub:type="noteref">3948</a> when he wrote to me as follows:</p>
			<p>‘To William Strahan, <abbr class="eoc">Esq.</abbr></p>
			<p>‘Sir,</p>
			<p>‘It would be very foolish for us to continue strangers any longer. You can never by persistency make wrong right. If I resented too acrimoniously, I resented only to yourself. Nobody ever saw or heard what I wrote. You saw that my anger was over, for in a day or two I came to your house. I have given you longer time; and I hope you have made so good use of it, as to be no longer on evil terms with, Sir,</p>
			<p>‘Your, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>‘Sam. Johnson.’</p>
			<p>“On this I called upon him; and he has since dined with me.”</p>
			<p>After this time, the same friendship as formerly continued between <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan. My friend mentioned to me a little circumstance of his attention, which, though we may smile at it, must be allowed to have its foundation in a nice and true knowledge of human life. “When I write to Scotland, (said he,) I employ Strahan to frank my letters, that he may have the consequence of appearing a Parliament-man among his countrymen.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-365">“To CAPTAIN LANGTON,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3949" id="noteref-3949" epub:type="noteref">3949</a> WARLEY-CAMP.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“When I recollect how long ago I was received with so much kindness at Warley Common, I am ashamed that I have not made some enquiries after my friends.</p>
			<p>“Pray how many sheep-stealers did you convict? and how did you punish them? When are you to be cantoned in better habitations? The air grows cold, and the ground damp. Longer stay in the camp cannot be without much danger to the health of the common men, if even the officers can escape.</p>
			<p>“You see that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy is now Dean of Carlisle; about five hundred a year, with a power of presenting himself to some good living. He is provided for.</p>
			<p>“The session of the CLUB is to commence with that of the Parliament. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Banks<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3950" id="noteref-3950" epub:type="noteref">3950</a> desires to be admitted; he will be a very honourable accession.</p>
			<p>“Did the King please you<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3951" id="noteref-3951" epub:type="noteref">3951</a>? The Coxheath men, I think, have some reason to complain<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3952" id="noteref-3952" epub:type="noteref">3952</a>: Reynolds says your camp is better than theirs.</p>
			<p>“I hope you find yourself able to encounter this weather. Take care of your own health; and, as you can, of your men. Be pleased to make my compliments to all the gentlemen whose notice I have had, and whose kindness I have experienced.</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“Sam. Johnson.”</p>
			<p>“October 31, 1778.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-366">I wrote to him on the 18th of August, the 18th of September, and the 6th of November; informing him of my having had another son born, whom I had called James;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3953" id="noteref-3953" epub:type="noteref">3953</a> that I had passed some time at Auchinleck; that the Countess of Loudoun, now in her ninety-ninth year, was as fresh as when he saw her,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3954" id="noteref-3954" epub:type="noteref">3954</a> and remembered him with respect; and that his mother by adoption, the Countess of Eglintoune,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3955" id="noteref-3955" epub:type="noteref">3955</a> had said to me, “Tell <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Johnson I love him exceedingly;” that I had again suffered much from bad spirits; and that as it was very long since I heard from him, I was not a little uneasy.</p>
			<p>The continuance of his regard for his friend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Burney, appears from the following letters:⁠—</p>
			<p>“To THE REVEREND DR. WHEELER,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3956" id="noteref-3956" epub:type="noteref">3956</a> OXFORD.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Burney, who brings this paper, is engaged in a History of Music; and having been told by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Markham of some <abbr>MSS.</abbr> relating to his subject, which are in the library of your College, is desirous to examine them. He is my friend; and therefore I take the liberty of intreating your favour and assistance in his enquiry: and can assure you, with great confidence, that if you knew him he would not want any intervenient solicitation to obtain the kindness of one who loves learning and virtue as you love them.</p>
			<p>“I have been flattering myself all the summer with the hope of paying my annual visit to my friends; but something has obstructed me: I still hope not to be long without seeing you. I should be glad of a little literary talk; and glad to show you, by the frequency of my visits, how eagerly I love it, when you talk it.</p>
			<p id="III-page-367">“I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“London, November 2, 1778.”</p>
			<h3>“TO THE REVEREND DR. EDWARDS,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3957" id="noteref-3957" epub:type="noteref">3957</a> OXFORD.</h3>
			<p>“SIR,</p>
			<p>“The bearer, DR. BURNEY, has had some account of a Welsh Manuscript in the Bodleian library, from which he hopes to gain some materials for his History of Music; but being ignorant of the language, is at a loss where to find assistance. I make no doubt but you, Sir, can help him through his difficulties, and therefore take the liberty of recommending him to your favour, as I am sure you will find him a man worthy of every civility that can be shown, and every benefit that can be conferred.</p>
			<p>“But we must not let Welsh drive us from Greek. What comes of Xenophon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3958" id="noteref-3958" epub:type="noteref">3958</a>? If you do not like the trouble of publishing the book, do not let your commentaries be lost; contrive that they may be published somewhere.</p>
			<p>“I am, Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“London, November 2, 1778.</p>
			<p>These letters procured <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Burney great kindness and friendly offices from both of these gentleman, not only on that occasion, but in future visits to the university.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3959" id="noteref-3959" epub:type="noteref">3959</a> The same year <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson not only wrote to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Joseph Warton in favour of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Burney’s youngest son, who was to be placed in the college of Winchester, but accompanied him when he went thither.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3960" id="noteref-3960" epub:type="noteref">3960</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-368">We surely cannot but admire the benevolent exertions of this great and good man, especially when we consider how grievously he was afflicted with bad health, and how uncomfortable his home was made by the perpetual jarring of those whom he charitably accommodated under his roof. He has sometimes suffered me to talk jocularly of his group of females, and call them his <q>Seraglio</q>. He thus mentions them, together with honest Levett, in one of his letters to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3961" id="noteref-3961" epub:type="noteref">3961</a>: “Williams hates everybody; Levett hates Desmoulins, and does not love Williams; Desmoulins hates them both; Poll<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3962" id="noteref-3962" epub:type="noteref">3962</a> loves none of them.” <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3963" id="noteref-3963" epub:type="noteref">3963</a></p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“It is indeed a long time since I wrote, and I think you have some reason to complain; however, you must not let small things disturb you, when you have such a fine addition to your happiness as a new boy, and I hope your lady’s health restored by bringing him. It seems very probable that a little care will now restore her, if any remains of her complaints are left.</p>
			<p>“You seem, if I understand your letter, to be gaining ground at<br/>
			Auchinleck,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3964" id="noteref-3964" epub:type="noteref">3964</a> an incident that would give me great delight.</p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>“When any fit of anxiety, or gloominess, or perversion of mind, lays hold upon you, make it a rule not to publish it by complaints, but exert your whole care to hide it; by endeavouring to hide it, you will drive it away. Be always busy.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3965" id="noteref-3965" epub:type="noteref">3965</a></p>
			<p>“The CLUB is to meet with the Parliament; we talk of electing Banks, the traveller; he will be a reputable member.</p>
			<p>“Langton has been encamped with his company of militia on Warley-common; I spent five days amongst them; he signalized himself as a diligent officer, and has very high respect in the regiment. He presided when I was there at a court-martial; he is now quartered in Hertfordshire; his lady and little ones are in Scotland. Paoli came to the camp and commended the soldiers.</p>
			<p id="III-page-369">“Of myself I have no great matter to say, my health is not restored, my nights are restless and tedious. The best night that I have had these twenty years was at Fort-Augustus.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3966" id="noteref-3966" epub:type="noteref">3966</a></p>
			<p>“I hope soon to send you a few lines to read.</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most affectionate,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“November 21, 1778.”</p>
			<p>About this time the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Hussey, who had been some time in trade, and was then a clergyman of the Church of England, being about to undertake a journey to Aleppo, and other parts of the East, which he accomplished, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, (who had long been in habits of intimacy with him,) honoured him with the following letter:⁠—</p>
			<p>“To MR. JOHN HUSSEY.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I have sent you the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Grammar</i>, and have left you two books more, by which I hope to be remembered; write my name in them; we may perhaps see each other no more, you part with my good wishes, nor do I despair of seeing you return. Let no opportunities of vice corrupt you; let no bad example seduce you; let the blindness of Muhammadans confirm you in Christianity. GOD bless you.</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your affectionate humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“December 29, 1778.”</p>
			<p>Johnson this year expressed great satisfaction at the publication of the first volume of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Discourses to the Royal Academy</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3967" id="noteref-3967" epub:type="noteref">3967</a> by Sir Joshua Reynolds, whom he always considered as one of his literary school.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3968" id="noteref-3968" epub:type="noteref">3968</a> Much praise indeed is due to those excellent <a id="III-page-370" /><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Discourses</i>, which are so universally admired, and for which the author received from the Empress of Russia a gold snuffbox, adorned with her profile in <i>bas relief</i>, set in diamonds; and containing what is infinitely more valuable, a slip of paper, on which are written with her Imperial Majesty’s own hand, the following words: “<i xml:lang="fr">Pour le Chevalier Reynolds en témoignage du contentement que j’ai ressentie<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3969" id="noteref-3969" epub:type="noteref">3969</a> à la lecture de ses excellens discours sur la peinture.</i>”</p>
			<p>In 1779, Johnson gave the world a luminous proof that the vigour of his mind in all its faculties, whether memory, judgement, or imagination, was not in the least abated; for this year came out the first four volumes of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prefaces, biographical and critical, to the most eminent of the English Poets</i>,[*] published by the booksellers of London. The remaining volumes came out in the year 1780.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3970" id="noteref-3970" epub:type="noteref">3970</a> The Poets were selected by the several booksellers who had the honorary copy right, which is still preserved among them by mutual compact, notwithstanding the decision of the House of Lords against the perpetuity of Literary Property.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3971" id="noteref-3971" epub:type="noteref">3971</a> We have his own authority,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3972" id="noteref-3972" epub:type="noteref">3972</a> that by his recommendation the poems of Blackmore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3973" id="noteref-3973" epub:type="noteref">3973</a> Watts,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3974" id="noteref-3974" epub:type="noteref">3974</a> Pomfret,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3975" id="noteref-3975" epub:type="noteref">3975</a> and Yalden,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3976" id="noteref-3976" epub:type="noteref">3976</a> were added to the collection. Of this work I shall speak more particularly hereafter.</p>
			<p id="III-page-371">On the 22nd of January, I wrote to him on several topics, and mentioned that as he had been so good as to permit me to have the proof sheets of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives of the Poets</i>, I had written to his servant, Francis, to take care of them for me.</p>
			<p>“MR. BOSWELL TO DR. JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 2, 1779.</p>
			<p>“MY DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“Garrick’s death is a striking event; not that we should be surprised with the death of any man, who has lived sixty-two years; but because there was a <em>vivacity</em> in our late celebrated friend, which drove away the thoughts of <em>death</em> from any association with <em>him</em>. I am sure you will be tenderly affected with his departure;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3977" id="noteref-3977" epub:type="noteref">3977</a> and I would wish to hear from you upon the subject. I was obliged to him in my days of effervescence in London, when poor Derrick was my governor;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3978" id="noteref-3978" epub:type="noteref">3978</a> and since that time I received many civilities from him. Do you remember how pleasing it was, when I received a letter from him at Inverary,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3979" id="noteref-3979" epub:type="noteref">3979</a> upon our first return to civilized living after our Hebridean journey? I shall always remember him with affection as well as admiration.</p>
			<p>“On Saturday last, being the 30th of January,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3980" id="noteref-3980" epub:type="noteref">3980</a> I drank coffee and old port, and had solemn conversation with the Reverend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Falconer, a nonjuring bishop, a very learned and worthy man. He gave two toasts, which you will believe I drank with cordiality, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Samuel Johnson, and Flora Macdonald. I sat about four hours with him, and it was really as if I had been living in the last century. The Episcopal Church of Scotland, though faithful to the royal house of Stuart, has never accepted of any <i xml:lang="fr">congé d’liré</i>, since the Revolution; it is the <a id="III-page-372" />only true Episcopal Church in Scotland, as it has its own succession of bishops. For as to the episcopal clergy who take the oaths to the present government, they indeed follow the rites of the Church of England, but, as Bishop Falconer observed, ‘they are not <em>Episcopals</em>; for they are under no bishop, as a bishop cannot have authority beyond his diocese.’ This venerable gentleman did me the honour to dine with me yesterday, and he laid his hands upon the heads of my little ones. We had a good deal of curious literary conversation, particularly about <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas Ruddiman,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3981" id="noteref-3981" epub:type="noteref">3981</a> with whom he lived in great friendship.</p>
			<p>“Any fresh instance of the uncertainty of life makes one embrace more closely a valuable friend. My dear and much respected Sir, may GOD preserve you long in this world while I am in it.</p>
			<p>“I am ever,</p>
			<p>“Your much obliged,</p>
			<p>“And affectionate humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p>On the 23rd of February I wrote to him again, complaining of his silence, as I had heard he was ill, and had written to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale, for information concerning him; and I announced my intention of soon being again in London.</p>
			<p>“TO JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“Why should you take such delight to make a bustle, to write to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale that I am negligent, and to Francis to do what is so very unnecessary. Thrale, you may be sure, cared not about it; and I shall spare Francis the trouble, by ordering a set both of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Poets</i> to dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3982" id="noteref-3982" epub:type="noteref">3982</a> in acknowledgement of her marmalade. Persuade her to accept them, and accept them kindly. If I thought she would receive them scornfully, I would send them to Miss Boswell, who, I hope, has yet none of her mamma’s ill-will to me.</p>
			<p>“I would send sets of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives</i>, four volumes, to some other friends, to Lord Hailes first. His second volume lies by my bedside; a book surely of great labour, and to every just thinker of great delight. Write me word to whom I shall send besides;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3983" id="noteref-3983" epub:type="noteref">3983</a> would it please Lord Auchinleck? <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale waits in the coach.</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir, <abbr>etc.</abbr>,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“March 13, 1779.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-373">This letter crossed me on the road to London, where I arrived on Monday, March 15, and next morning at a late hour, found <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson sitting over his tea, attended by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Desmoulins, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Levett, and a clergyman, who had come to submit some poetical pieces to his revision. It is wonderful what a number and variety of writers, some of them even unknown to him, prevailed on his good-nature to look over their works, and suggest corrections and improvements.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3984" id="noteref-3984" epub:type="noteref">3984</a> My arrival interrupted for a little while the important business of this true representative of Bayes;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3985" id="noteref-3985" epub:type="noteref">3985</a> upon its being resumed, I found that the subject under immediate consideration was a translation, yet in manuscript, of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem" xml:lang="la">Carmen Seculare</i> of Horace, which had this year been set to music, and performed as a public entertainment in London, for the joint benefit of Monsieur Philidor and Signer Baretti.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3986" id="noteref-3986" epub:type="noteref">3986</a> When Johnson had done reading, the author asked him bluntly, “If upon the whole it was a good translation?” Johnson, whose regard for truth was uncommonly strict, seemed to be puzzled for a moment, what answer to make; as he certainly could not honestly commend the performance: with exquisite address he evaded the question thus, “Sir, I do not say that it may not be made a very good translation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3987" id="noteref-3987" epub:type="noteref">3987</a>” Here nothing whatever in <a id="III-page-374" />favour of the performance was affirmed, and yet the writer was not shocked. A printed <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Ode to the Warlike Genius of Britain</i>, came next in review; the bard <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3988" id="noteref-3988" epub:type="noteref">3988</a> was a lank bony figure, with short black hair; he was writhing himself in agitation, while Johnson read, and showing his teeth in a grin of earnestness, exclaimed in broken sentences, and in a keen sharp tone, “Is that poetry, Sir?⁠—Is it <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pindar</i>?” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, there is here a great deal of what is called poetry.” Then, turning to me, the poet cried, “My muse has not been long upon the town, and (pointing to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Ode</i>) it trembles under the hand of the great critic.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3989" id="noteref-3989" epub:type="noteref">3989</a>” Johnson, in a tone of displeasure, asked him, “Why do you praise Anson <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3990" id="noteref-3990" epub:type="noteref">3990</a>?” I did not trouble him by asking his reason for this question. He proceeded, “Here is an error, Sir; you have made Genius feminine.” <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3991" id="noteref-3991" epub:type="noteref">3991</a> “Palpable, Sir; (cried the enthusiast) I know it. But (in a lower tone) it was to pay a compliment to the Duchess of Devonshire, with which her Grace was pleased. She is walking across Coxheath, in the military uniform, and I suppose her to be the Genius of Britain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3992" id="noteref-3992" epub:type="noteref">3992</a>” <a id="III-page-375" />JOHNSON. “Sir, you are giving a reason for it; but that will not make it right. You may have a reason why two and two should make five; but they will still make but four.”</p>
			<p>Although I was several times with him in the course of the following days, such it seems were my occupations, or such my negligence, that I have preserved no memorial of his conversation till Friday, March 26, when I visited him. He said he expected to be attacked on account of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives of the Poets</i>. “However (said he) I would rather be attacked than unnoticed. For the worst thing you can do to an author is to be silent as to his works..<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3993" id="noteref-3993" epub:type="noteref">3993</a> An assault upon a town is a bad thing; but starving it is still worse; an assault may be unsuccessful; you may have more men killed than you kill; but if you starve the town, you are sure of victory.”</p>
			<p>Talking of a friend of ours associating with persons of very discordant principles and characters; I said he was a very universal man, quite a man of the world.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3994" id="noteref-3994" epub:type="noteref">3994</a> JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir; but one may be so much a man of the world as to be nothing in the world. I remember a passage in Goldsmith’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Vicar of Wakefield</i>, which he was afterwards fool enough to expunge: <a id="III-page-376" />‘I do not love a man who is zealous for nothing.’ ” BOSWELL. “That was a fine passage.” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir: there was another fine passage too, which he struck out: ‘When I was a young man, being anxious to distinguish myself, I was perpetually starting new propositions. But I soon gave this over; for, I found that generally what was new was false.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3995" id="noteref-3995" epub:type="noteref">3995</a>’ ” I said I did not like to sit with people of whom I had not a good opinion. JOHNSON. “But you must not indulge your delicacy too much; or you will be a <i>tête-à-tête</i> man all your life.”</p>
			<p>During my stay in London this spring, I find I was unaccountably<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3996" id="noteref-3996" epub:type="noteref">3996</a> negligent in preserving Johnson’s sayings, more so than at any time when I was happy enough to have an opportunity of hearing his wisdom and wit. There is no help for it now. I must content myself with presenting such scraps as I have. But I am nevertheless ashamed and vexed to think how much has been lost. It is not that there was a bad crop this year; but that I was not sufficiently careful in gathering it in. I, therefore, in some instances can only exhibit a few detached fragments.</p>
			<p>Talking of the wonderful concealment of the author of the celebrated letters signed <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Junius</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3997" id="noteref-3997" epub:type="noteref">3997</a> he said, “I should have believed Burke to be Junius, because I know no man but Burke who is capable of writing these letters;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3998" id="noteref-3998" epub:type="noteref">3998</a> but Burke spontaneously denied it to me. The case would have been different had I <a id="III-page-377" />asked him if he was the author; a man so questioned, as to an anonymous publication, may think he has a right to deny it.”.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3999" id="noteref-3999" epub:type="noteref">3999</a></p>
			<p>He observed that his old friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheridan, had been honoured with extraordinary attention in his own country, by having had an exception made in his favour in an Irish Act of Parliament concerning insolvent debtors.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4000" id="noteref-4000" epub:type="noteref">4000</a> “Thus to be singled out (said he) by a legislature, as an object of public consideration and kindness, is a proof of no common merit.”</p>
			<p>At Streatham, on Monday, March 29, at breakfast he maintained that a father had no right to control the inclinations of his daughters in marriage.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4001" id="noteref-4001" epub:type="noteref">4001</a></p>
			<p>On Wednesday, March 31, when I visited him, and confessed an excess of which I had very seldom been guilty; that I had spent a whole night in playing at cards, and that I could not look back on it with satisfaction; instead of a harsh animadversion, he mildly said, “Alas, Sir, on how few things can we look back with satisfaction.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-378">On Thursday, April 1, he commended one of the Dukes of Devonshire for “a dogged veracity.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4002" id="noteref-4002" epub:type="noteref">4002</a>” He said too, “London is nothing to some people; but to a man whose pleasure is intellectual, London is the place. And there is no place where economy can be so well practised as in London. More can be had here for the money, even by ladies, than anywhere else. You cannot play tricks with your fortune in a small place; you must make an uniform appearance. Here a lady may have well-furnished apartments, and elegant dress, without any meat in her kitchen.”</p>
			<p>I was amused by considering with how much ease and coolness he could write or talk to a friend, exhorting him not to suppose that happiness was not to be found as well in other places as in London;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4003" id="noteref-4003" epub:type="noteref">4003</a> when he himself was at all times sensible of its being, comparatively speaking, a heaven upon earth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4004" id="noteref-4004" epub:type="noteref">4004</a> The truth is, that by those who from sagacity, attention, and experience, have learnt the full advantage of London, its preeminence over every other place, not only for variety of enjoyment, but for comfort, will be felt with a philosophical exultation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4005" id="noteref-4005" epub:type="noteref">4005</a> The freedom from remark and petty censure, with which life may be passed there, is a circumstance which a man who knows the teazing restraint of a narrow circle must relish highly. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burke, whose orderly and amiable domestic habits might make the eye of observation less irksome to him than to most men, said once very pleasantly, in my hearing, “Though I have the honour to represent Bristol, I should not like to live there; I should be obliged to be so much <em>upon my good behaviour</em>.” In London, a man may live in splendid society at one time, and in frugal retirement at another, without animadversion. There, and there alone, a man’s own house is truly his <em>castle</em>, in which <a id="III-page-379" />he can be in perfect safety from intrusion whenever he pleases. I never shall forget how well this was expressed to me one day by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Meynell<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4006" id="noteref-4006" epub:type="noteref">4006</a>: “The chief advantage of London (said he) is, that a man is always <em>so near his burrow</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4007" id="noteref-4007" epub:type="noteref">4007</a>”</p>
			<p>He said of one of his old acquaintances, “He is very fit for a travelling governor. He knows French very well. He is a man of good principles; and there would be no danger that a young gentleman should catch his manner; for it is so very bad, that it must be avoided. In that respect he would be like the drunken Helot.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4008" id="noteref-4008" epub:type="noteref">4008</a>”</p>
			<p>A gentleman has informed me, that Johnson said of the same person, “Sir, he has the most <em>inverted</em> understanding of any man whom I have ever known.”</p>
			<p>On Friday, April 2, being Good-Friday, I visited him in the morning as usual; and finding that we insensibly fell into a train of ridicule upon the foibles of one of our friends, a very worthy man,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4009" id="noteref-4009" epub:type="noteref">4009</a> I, by way of a check, quoted some good admonition from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Government of the Tongue</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4010" id="noteref-4010" epub:type="noteref">4010</a> that very pious book. It happened also remarkably enough, that the subject of the sermon preached to us today by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Burrows, the rector of <abbr>St.</abbr> Clement Danes, was the certainty that at the last day we must give an account of “the deeds done in the body;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4011" id="noteref-4011" epub:type="noteref">4011</a>” and, amongst various acts of culpability he mentioned evil-speaking. As we were moving slowly along in the crowd from church, Johnson jogged my elbow, and said, “Did you attend to the sermon?” “Yes, Sir, (said I,) it was very applicable to <em>us</em>.” He, however, stood upon the defensive. “Why, Sir, the sense of ridicule is given us, and <a id="III-page-380" />may be lawfully used.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4012" id="noteref-4012" epub:type="noteref">4012</a> The author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Government of the Tongue</i> would have us treat all men alike.”</p>
			<p>In the interval between morning and evening service, he endeavoured to employ himself earnestly in devotional exercises; and as he has mentioned in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prayers and Meditations</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4013" id="noteref-4013" epub:type="noteref">4013</a> gave me “<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Pensées de Paschal</i>“, that I might not interrupt him. I preserve the book with reverence. His presenting it to me is marked upon it with his own hand, and I have found in it a truly divine unction. We went to church again in the afternoon.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4014" id="noteref-4014" epub:type="noteref">4014</a></p>
			<p>On Saturday, April 3, I visited him at night, and found him sitting in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams’s room, with her, and one who he afterwards told me was a natural son<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4015" id="noteref-4015" epub:type="noteref">4015</a> of the second Lord Southwell. The table had a singular appearance, being covered with a heterogeneous assemblage of oysters and porter for his company, and tea for himself. I mentioned my having heard an eminent physician, who was himself a Christian, argue in favour of universal toleration, and maintain, that no man could be hurt by another man’s differing from him in opinion. JOHNSON. “Sir, you are to a certain degree hurt by knowing that even one man does not believe.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4016" id="noteref-4016" epub:type="noteref">4016</a>”</p>
			<p>On Easter-day, after solemn service at <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s, I dined with him: <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allen the printer was also his guest. He was uncommonly silent; and I have not written down anything, except a single curious fact, which, having the sanction of his inflexible <a id="III-page-381" />veracity, may be received as a striking instance of human insensibility and inconsideration. As he was passing by a fishmonger who was skinning an eel alive, he heard him “curse it, because it would not lye still.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4017" id="noteref-4017" epub:type="noteref">4017</a>”</p>
			<p>On Wednesday, April 7, I dined with him at Sir Joshua Reynolds’s. I have not marked what company was there. Johnson harangued upon the qualities of different liquors; and spoke with great contempt of claret, as so weak, that “a man would be drowned by it before it made him drunk.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4018" id="noteref-4018" epub:type="noteref">4018</a>” He was persuaded to drink one glass of it, that he might judge, not from recollection, which might be dim, but from immediate sensation. He shook his head, and said, “Poor stuff! No, Sir, claret is the liquor for boys; port for men; but he who aspires to be a hero (smiling) must drink brandy. In the first place, the flavour of brandy is most grateful to the palate; and then brandy will do soonest for a man what drinking <em>can</em> do for him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4019" id="noteref-4019" epub:type="noteref">4019</a> There are, indeed, few who are able to drink brandy. That is a power rather to be wished for than attained. And yet, (proceeded he) as in all pleasure hope is a considerable part, I know not but fruition comes too quick by brandy. Florence wine I think the worst; it is wine only to the eye; it is wine neither while you are drinking it, nor after you have drunk it; it neither pleases the taste, nor exhilarates the spirits.” I reminded him how heartily he and I used to drink wine together, when we were first acquainted; and how I used to have a headache after sitting up with him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4020" id="noteref-4020" epub:type="noteref">4020</a> He did not like to have this recalled, or, perhaps, thinking that I boasted improperly, resolved to have a witty stroke at me: “Nay, Sir, it was not the <em>wine</em> that made your head ache, but the <em>sense</em> that I put into it.” BOSWELL. <a id="III-page-382" />“What, Sir! will sense make the head ache?” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir, (with a smile) when it is not used to it.”⁠—No man who has a true relish of pleasantry could be offended at this; especially if Johnson in a long intimacy had given him repeated proofs of his regard and good estimation. I used to say, that as he had given me a thousand pounds in praise, he had a good right now and then to take a guinea from me.</p>
			<p>On Thursday, April 8, I dined with him at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allan Ramsay’s, with Lord Graham<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4021" id="noteref-4021" epub:type="noteref">4021</a> and some other company. We talked of Shakespeare’s witches. JOHNSON. “They are beings of his own creation; they are a compound of malignity and meanness, without any abilities; and are quite different from the Italian magician. King James says in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Daemonology</i>, “Magicians command the devils: witches are their servants. The Italian magicians are elegant beings.” RAMSAY. “Opera witches, not Drury-lane witches.” Johnson observed, that abilities might be employed in a narrow sphere, as in getting money, which he said he believed no man could do, without vigorous parts, though concentrated to a point.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4022" id="noteref-4022" epub:type="noteref">4022</a> RAMSAY. “Yes, like a strong horse in a mill; he pulls better.”</p>
			<p>Lord Graham, while he praised the beauty of Lochlomond, on the banks of which is his family seat, complained of the climate, and said he could not bear it. JOHNSON. “Nay, my Lord, don’t talk so: you may bear it well enough. Your ancestors have borne it more years than I can tell.” This was a handsome compliment to the antiquity of the House of Montrose. His <a id="III-page-383" />Lordship told me afterwards, that he had only affected to complain of the climate; lest, if he had spoken as favourably of his country as he really thought, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson might have attacked it. Johnson was very courteous to Lady Margaret Macdonald. “Madam, (said he,) when I was in the Isle of Sky, I heard of the people running to take the stones off the road, lest Lady Margaret’s horse should stumble.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4023" id="noteref-4023" epub:type="noteref">4023</a>”</p>
			<p>Lord Graham commended <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Drummond<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4024" id="noteref-4024" epub:type="noteref">4024</a> at Naples, as a man of extraordinary talents; and added, that he had a great love of liberty. JOHNSON. “He is <em>young</em>, my Lord; (looking to his Lordship with an arch smile) all <em>boys</em> love liberty, till experience convinces them they are not so fit to govern themselves as they imagined. We are all agreed as to our own liberty; we would have as much of it as we can get; but we are not agreed as to the liberty of others: for in proportion as we take, others must lose. I believe we hardly wish that the mob should have liberty to govern us. When that was the case some time ago, no man was at liberty not to have candles in his windows.” RAMSAY. “The result is, that order is better than confusion.” JOHNSON. “The result is, that order cannot be had but by subordination.”</p>
			<p>On Friday, April 16, I had been present at the trial of the unfortunate <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hackman, who, in a fit of frantic jealous love, had shot Miss Ray, the favourite of a nobleman.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4025" id="noteref-4025" epub:type="noteref">4025</a> Johnson, in whose company I dined today with some other friends, was much interested by my account of what passed, and particularly <a id="III-page-384" />with his prayer for the mercy of heaven.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4026" id="noteref-4026" epub:type="noteref">4026</a> He said, in a solemn fervid tone, “I hope he <em>shall</em> find mercy.”</p>
			<p>This day<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4027" id="noteref-4027" epub:type="noteref">4027</a> a violent altercation arose between Johnson and Beauclerk,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4028" id="noteref-4028" epub:type="noteref">4028</a> which having made much noise at the time, I think it proper, in order to prevent any future misrepresentation, to give a minute account of it.</p>
			<p>In talking of Hackman, Johnson argued, as Judge Blackstone had done, that his being furnished with two pistols was a proof that he meant to shoot two persons. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beauclerk said, “No; for that every wise man who intended to shoot himself, took two pistols, that he might be sure of doing it at once. Lord ⸺’s cook shot himself with one pistol, and lived ten days in great agony. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> ⸺, who loved buttered muffins, but durst not eat them because they disagreed with his stomach, resolved to shoot himself; and then he eat three buttered muffins for breakfast, before shooting himself, knowing that he should not be troubled with indigestion:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4029" id="noteref-4029" epub:type="noteref">4029</a> <em>he</em> had two charged pistols; one was found lying charged upon the table by him, after he had shot himself with the other.” “Well, (said Johnson, with an air of triumph,) you see here one pistol was sufficient.” Beauclerk replied smartly, “Because it happened to kill him.” And either then or a very little afterwards, being piqued at Johnson’s triumphant remark, added, “This is what you don’t know, and I do.” There was then a cessation of the dispute; and some minutes intervened, during which, dinner and the glass went on cheerfully; when Johnson suddenly and abruptly exclaimed, “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beauclerk, how came you to talk so petulantly to me, as ‘This is what you don’t know, but what I know’? One thing <em>I</em> know, which <em>you</em> don’t seem to know, <a id="III-page-385" />that you are very uncivil.” BEAUCLERK. “Because you began by being uncivil, (which you always are.)” The words in parenthesis were, I believe, not heard by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson. Here again there was a cessation of arms. Johnson told me, that the reason why he waited at first some time without taking any notice of what <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beauclerk said, was because he was thinking whether he should resent it. But when he considered that there were present a young Lord and an eminent traveller, two men of the world with whom he had never dined before, he was apprehensive that they might think they had a right to take such liberties with him as Beauclerk did, and therefore resolved he would not let it pass; adding, that “he would not appear a coward.” A little while after this, the conversation turned on the violence of Hackman’s temper. Johnson then said, “It was his business to <em>command</em> his temper, as my friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beauclerk, should have done some time ago.” BEAUCLERK. “I should learn of <em>you</em>, Sir.” JOHNSON. “Sir, you have given <em>me</em> opportunities enough of learning, when I have been in <em>your</em> company. No man loves to be treated with contempt.” BEAUCLERK. (with a polite inclination towards Johnson) “Sir, you have known me twenty years, and however I may have treated others, you may be sure I could never treat you with contempt” JOHNSON. “Sir, you have said more than was necessary.” Thus it ended; and Beauclerk’s coach not having come for him till very late, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson and another gentleman sat with him a long time after the rest of the company were gone; and he and I dined at Beauclerk’s on the Saturday se’nnight following.</p>
			<p>After this tempest had subsided, I recollect the following particulars of his conversation:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I am always for getting a boy forward in his learning; for that is a sure good. I would let him at first read <em>any</em> English book which happens to engage his attention; because you have done a great deal when you have brought him to have entertainment from a book. He’ll get better books afterwards.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4030" id="noteref-4030" epub:type="noteref">4030</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-386">“Mallet, I believe, never wrote a single line of his projected life of the Duke of Marlborough.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4031" id="noteref-4031" epub:type="noteref">4031</a> He groped for materials; and thought of it, till he had exhausted his mind. Thus it sometimes happens that men entangle themselves in their own schemes.”</p>
			<p>“To be contradicted, in order to force you to talk, is mighty unpleasing. You <em>shine</em>, indeed; but it is by being <em>ground</em>.”</p>
			<p>Of a gentleman who made some figure among the <i>Literati</i> of his time, (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fitzherbert,)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4032" id="noteref-4032" epub:type="noteref">4032</a> he said, “What eminence he had was by a felicity of manner; he had no more learning than what he could not help.”</p>
			<p>On Saturday, April 24, I dined with him at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beauclerk’s, with Sir Joshua Reynolds, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jones, (afterwards Sir William,) <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Steevens, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Paradise, and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Higgins. I mentioned that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkes had attacked Garrick to me, as a man who had no friend. “I believe he is right, Sir. [Greek: <i xml:lang="grc-Ltn">Oi philoi, ou philos</i>]⁠—He had friends, but no friend.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4033" id="noteref-4033" epub:type="noteref">4033</a> Garrick was so diffused, he had no man to whom he wished to unbosom himself. He found people always ready to applaud him, and that always for the same thing: so he saw life with great uniformity.” I took upon me, for once, to fight with Goliath’s weapons, and play the sophist.⁠—“Garrick did not need a friend, as he got from everybody all he wanted. What is a friend? One who supports you and comforts you, while others do not. Friendship, you know, Sir, is the cordial drop, ‘to make the nauseous draught of life go down<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4034" id="noteref-4034" epub:type="noteref">4034</a>:’ but if the draught be not nauseous, if it be all sweet, <a id="III-page-387" />there is no occasion for that drop.” JOHNSON. “Many men would not be content to live so. I hope I should not. They would wish to have an intimate friend, with whom they might compare minds, and cherish private virtues.” One of the company mentioned Lord Chesterfield, as a man who had no friend. JOHNSON. “There were more materials to make friendship in Garrick, had he not been so diffused.” BOSWELL. “Garrick was pure gold, but beat out to thin leaf. Lord Chesterfield was tinsel.” JOHNSON. “Garrick was a very good man, the cheerfullest man of his age;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4035" id="noteref-4035" epub:type="noteref">4035</a> a decent liver in a profession which is supposed to give indulgence to licentiousness; and a man who gave away, freely, money acquired by himself. He began the world with a great hunger for money; the son of a half-pay officer, bred in a family, whose study was to make fourpence do as much as others made fourpence halfpenny do. But, when he had got money, he was very liberal.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4036" id="noteref-4036" epub:type="noteref">4036</a> I presumed to animadvert on his eulogy on Garrick, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives of the Poets</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4037" id="noteref-4037" epub:type="noteref">4037</a> “You say, Sir, his death eclipsed the gaiety of nations.” <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4038" id="noteref-4038" epub:type="noteref">4038</a> JOHNSON. “I could not have said more nor less. It is the truth; <em>eclipsed</em>, not <em>extinguished</em>; and his death <em>did</em> eclipse; it was like a storm.” BOSWELL. “But why nations? Did his gaiety extend farther than his own nation?” JOHNSON. “Why, Sir, some exaggeration must be allowed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4039" id="noteref-4039" epub:type="noteref">4039</a> Besides, nations may be said⁠—if we allow the Scotch to be a nation, and to have gaiety⁠—which they have not. <em>You</em> are an exception, though. Come, gentlemen, let us candidly <a id="III-page-388" />admit that there is one Scotchman who is cheerful.” BEAUCLERK. “But he is a very unnatural Scotchman.” I, however, continued to think the compliment to Garrick hyperbolically untrue. His acting had ceased some time before his death; at any rate he had acted in Ireland but a short time, at an early period of his life,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4040" id="noteref-4040" epub:type="noteref">4040</a> and never in Scotland. I objected also to what appears an anticlimax of praise, when contrasted with the preceding panegyric⁠—“and diminished<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4041" id="noteref-4041" epub:type="noteref">4041</a> the public stock of harmless pleasure!”⁠—“Is not harmless pleasure very tame?” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, harmless pleasure is the highest praise. Pleasure is a word of dubious import; pleasure is in general dangerous, and pernicious to virtue; to be able therefore to furnish pleasure that is harmless, pleasure pure and unalloyed, is as great a power as man can possess.” This was, perhaps, as ingenious a defence as could be made; still, however, I was not satisfied.</p>
			<p>A celebrated wit<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4042" id="noteref-4042" epub:type="noteref">4042</a> being mentioned, he said, “One may say of him as was said of a French wit, <i xml:lang="fr">Il n’a de l’esprit que contre Dieu</i>. I have been several times in company with him, but never perceived any strong power of wit. He produces a general effect by various means; he has a cheerful countenance and a <a id="III-page-389" />gay voice. Besides his trade is wit. It would be as wild in him to come into company without merriment, as for a highwayman to take the road without his pistols.”</p>
			<p>Talking of the effects of drinking, he said, “Drinking may be practised with great prudence; a man who exposes himself when he is intoxicated, has not the art of getting drunk; a sober man who happens occasionally to get drunk, readily enough goes into a new company, which a man who has been drinking should never do. Such a man will undertake anything; he is without skill in inebriation. I used to slink home, when I had drunk too much.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4043" id="noteref-4043" epub:type="noteref">4043</a> A man accustomed to self-examination will be conscious when he is drunk, though an habitual drunkard will not be conscious of it. I knew a physician who for twenty years was not sober; yet in a pamphlet, which he wrote upon fevers, he appealed to Garrick and me for his vindication from a charge of drunkenness.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4044" id="noteref-4044" epub:type="noteref">4044</a> A bookseller (naming him) who got a large fortune by trade,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4045" id="noteref-4045" epub:type="noteref">4045</a> was so habitually and equably drunk, that his most intimate friends never perceived that he was more sober at one time than another.”</p>
			<p>Talking of celebrated and successful irregular practisers in physic; he said, “Taylor<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4046" id="noteref-4046" epub:type="noteref">4046</a> was the most ignorant man I ever knew; but sprightly. Ward<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4047" id="noteref-4047" epub:type="noteref">4047</a> the dullest. Taylor challenged me <a id="III-page-390" />once to talk Latin with him; (laughing). I quoted some of Horace, which he took to be a part of my own speech. He said a few words well enough.” BEAUCLERK. “I remember, Sir, you said that Taylor was an instance how far impudence could carry ignorance.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beauclerk was very entertaining this day, and told us a number of short stories in a lively elegant manner, and with that air of <em>the world</em> which has I know not what impressive effect, as if there were something more than is expressed, or than perhaps we could perfectly understand.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4048" id="noteref-4048" epub:type="noteref">4048</a> As Johnson and I accompanied Sir Joshua Reynolds in his coach, Johnson said, “There is in Beauclerk a predominance over his company, that one does not like. But he is a man who has lived so much in the world, that he has a short story on every occasion; he is always ready to talk, and is never exhausted.”</p>
			<p>Johnson and I passed the evening at Miss Reynolds’s, Sir Joshua’s sister. I mentioned that an eminent friend of ours,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4049" id="noteref-4049" epub:type="noteref">4049</a> talking of the common remark, that affection descends, said, that “this was wisely contrived for the preservation of mankind; for which it was not so necessary that there should be affection from children to parents, as from parents to children; nay, there would be no harm in that view though children should at a certain age eat their parents.” JOHNSON. “But, Sir, if this were known generally to be the case, parents would not have affection for children.” BOSWELL. “True, Sir; for it is in expectation of a return that parents are so attentive to their children; and I know a very pretty instance of a little girl of whom her father was very fond, who once when he was in a melancholy fit, and had gone to bed, persuaded him to rise in good humour by saying, ‘My dear papa, please to get up, and let me help you on with your clothes, that I may learn to do it when you are an old man.’ ”</p>
			<p id="III-page-391">Soon after this time a little incident occurred, which I will not suppress, because I am desirous that my work should be, as much as is consistent with the strictest truth, an antidote to the false and injurious notions of his character, which have been given by others, and therefore I infuse every drop of genuine sweetness into my biographical cup.</p>
			<p>“TO DR. JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“MY DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I am in great pain with an inflamed foot, and obliged to keep my bed, so am prevented from having the pleasure to dine at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ramsay’s today, which is very hard; and my spirits are sadly sunk. Will you be so friendly as to come and sit an hour with me in the evening.</p>
			<p>“I am ever</p>
			<p>“Your most faithful,</p>
			<p>“And affectionate humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p>“South Audley-street,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4050" id="noteref-4050" epub:type="noteref">4050</a><br/>
			Monday, April 26.”</p>
			<p>“TO MR. BOSWELL.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Johnson laments the absence of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boswell, and will come to him.”</p>
			<p>“Harley-street.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4051" id="noteref-4051" epub:type="noteref">4051</a></p>
			<p>He came to me in the evening, and brought Sir Joshua Reynolds. I need scarcely say, that their conversation, while they sat by my bedside, was the most pleasing opiate to pain that could have been administered.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4052" id="noteref-4052" epub:type="noteref">4052</a></p>
			<p>Johnson being now better disposed to obtain information concerning Pope than he was last year,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4053" id="noteref-4053" epub:type="noteref">4053</a> sent by me to my Lord <a id="III-page-392" />Marchmont a present of those volumes of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives of the Poets</i> which were at this time published, with a request to have permission to wait on him; and his Lordship, who had called on him twice, obligingly appointed Saturday, the first of May, for receiving us.</p>
			<p>On that morning Johnson came to me from Streatham, and after drinking chocolate, at General Paoli’s, in South-Audley-street, we proceeded to Lord Marchmont’s in Curzon-street. His Lordship met us at the door of his library, and with great politeness said to Johnson, “I am not going to make an encomium upon <em>myself</em>, by telling you the high respect I have for <em>you</em>, Sir.” Johnson was exceedingly courteous; and the interview, which lasted about two hours, during which the Earl communicated his anecdotes of Pope, was as agreeable as I could have wished.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4054" id="noteref-4054" epub:type="noteref">4054</a> When we came out, I said to Johnson, that considering his Lordship’s civility, I should have been vexed if he had again failed to come. “Sir, (said he,) I would rather have given twenty pounds than not have come.” I accompanied him to Streatham, where we dined, and returned to town in the evening.</p>
			<p>On Monday, May 3, I dined with him at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly’s;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4055" id="noteref-4055" epub:type="noteref">4055</a> I pressed him this day for his opinion on the passage in Parnell, concerning which I had in vain questioned him in several letters, and at length obtained it in <em>due form of law</em>.</p>
			<p>CASE for <abbr>Dr.</abbr> JOHNSON’S Opinion; 3rd of May, 1779.</p>
			<p>“PARNELL, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Hermit</i>, has the following passage:</p>
			<p>‘To clear this doubt, to know the world by sight,<br/>
			To find if <em>books</em> and<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4056" id="noteref-4056" epub:type="noteref">4056</a> <em>swains</em> report it right:</p>
			<p id="III-page-393">(For yet by <em>swains alone</em> the world he knew,<br/>
			Whose feet came wand’ring o’er the nightly dew.)’</p>
			<p>“Is there not a contradiction in its being <em>first</em> supposed that the <em>Hermit</em> knew <em>both</em> what books and swains reported of the world; yet <em>afterwards</em> said, that he knew it by swains <em>alone</em>?” “I think it an inaccuracy.⁠—He mentions two instructors in the first line, and says he had only one in the next..<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4057" id="noteref-4057" epub:type="noteref">4057</a>”</p>
			<p>This evening I set out for Scotland.</p>
			<p>“To MRS. LUCY PORTER, IN LICHFIELD.</p>
			<p>“DEAR MADAM,</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Green has informed me that you are much better; I hope I need not tell you that I am glad of it. I cannot boast of being much better; my old nocturnal complaint still pursues me, and my respiration is difficult, though much easier than when I left you the summer before last. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale are well; Miss has been a little indisposed; but she is got well again. They have since the loss of their boy had two daughters; but they seem likely to want a son.</p>
			<p>“I hope you had some books which I sent you. I was sorry for poor <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Adey’s death, and am afraid you will be sometimes solitary; but endeavour, whether alone or in company, to keep yourself cheerful. My friends likewise die very fast; but such is the state of man.</p>
			<p>“I am, dear love,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“May 4, 1779.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-394">He had, before I left London, resumed the conversation concerning the appearance of a ghost at Newcastle upon Tyne, which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Wesley believed, but to which Johnson did not give credit.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4058" id="noteref-4058" epub:type="noteref">4058</a> I was, however, desirous to examine the question closely, and at the same time wished to be made acquainted with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Wesley; for though I differed from him in some points, I admired his various talents, and loved his pious zeal. At my request, therefore, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson gave me a letter of introduction to him.</p>
			<p>“To THE REVEREND MR. JOHN WESLEY.</p>
			<p>SIR,</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boswell, a gentleman who has been long known to me, is desirous of being known to you, and has asked this recommendation, which I give him with great willingness, because I think it very much to be wished that worthy and religious men should be acquainted with each other.</p>
			<p>I am, Sir,</p>
			<p>Your most humble servant,<br/>
			“SAM. JOHNSON.”<br/>
			May 3, 1779.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wesley being in the course of his ministry at Edinburgh, I presented this letter to him, and was very politely received. I begged to have it returned to me, which was accordingly done. His state<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4059" id="noteref-4059" epub:type="noteref">4059</a> of the evidence as to the ghost did not satisfy me. I did not write to Johnson, as usual, upon my return to my family, but tried how he would be affected by my silence. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dilly sent me a copy of a note which he received from him on the 13th of July, in these words:⁠—</p>
			<p>“TO MR. DILLY.</p>
			<p>SIR,</p>
			<p>Since <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boswell’s departure I have never heard from him; please to send word what you know of him, and whether you have sent my books to his lady. I am, <abbr>etc.</abbr>,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>My readers will not doubt that his solicitude about me was very flattering.</p>
			<p id="III-page-395">“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“What can possibly have happened, that keeps us two such strangers to each other? I expected to have heard from you when you came home; I expected afterwards. I went into the country and returned;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4060" id="noteref-4060" epub:type="noteref">4060</a> and yet there is no letter from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boswell. No ill I hope has happened; and if ill should happen, why should it be concealed from him who loves you? Is it a fit of humour, that has disposed you to try who can hold out longest without writing? If it be, you have the victory. But I am afraid of something bad; set me free from my suspicions.</p>
			<p>“My thoughts are at present employed in guessing the reason of your silence: you must not expect that I should tell you anything, if I had anything to tell. Write, pray write to me, and let me know what is, or what has been the cause of this long interruption.</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most affectionate humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“July 13, 1779.”</p>
			<p>“To DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, July 17, 1779.</p>
			<p>“MY DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“What may be justly denominated a supine indolence of mind has been my state of existence since I last returned to Scotland. In a livelier state I had often suffered severely from long intervals of silence on your part; and I had even been chided by you for expressing my uneasiness. I was willing to take advantage of my insensibility, and while I could bear the experiment, to try whether your affection for me would, after an unusual silence on my part, make you write first. This afternoon I have had very high satisfaction by receiving your kind letter of inquiry, for which I most gratefully thank you. I am doubtful if it was right to make the experiment; though I have gained by it. I was beginning to grow tender, <a id="III-page-396" />and to upbraid myself, especially after having dreamt two nights ago that I was with you. I and my wife, and my four children, are all well. I would not delay one post to answer your letter; but as it is late, I have not time to do more. You shall soon hear from me, upon many and various particulars; and I shall never again put you to any test.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4061" id="noteref-4061" epub:type="noteref">4061</a></p>
			<p>I am, with veneration, my dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your much obliged,</p>
			<p>“And faithful humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p>On the 22nd of July, I wrote to him again; and gave him an account of my last interview with my worthy friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward Dilly, at his brother’s house at Southill, in Bedfordshire, where he died soon after I parted from him,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4062" id="noteref-4062" epub:type="noteref">4062</a> leaving me a very kind remembrance of his regard.</p>
			<p>I informed him that Lord Hailes, who had promised to furnish him with some anecdotes for his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives of the Poets</i>, had sent me three instances of Prior’s borrowing from <i>Gombauld</i>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Recueil des Poetes</i>, tome 3. Epigram <q>To John I owed “great obligation,”</q> <abbr>p.</abbr> 25. <q>To the Duke of Noailles</q>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 32. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Sauntering Jack and Idle Joan</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 25.</p>
			<p>My letter was a pretty long one, and contained a variety of particulars; but he, it should seem, had not attended to it; for his next to me was as follows:⁠—</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“MY DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“Are you playing the same trick again, and trying who can keep silence longest? Remember that all tricks are either knavish or childish; and that it is as foolish to make experiments upon the constancy of a friend, as upon the chastity of a wife.</p>
			<p id="III-page-397">“What can be the cause of this second fit of silence, I cannot conjecture; but after one trick, I will not be cheated by another, nor will harass my thoughts with conjectures about the motives of a man who, probably, acts only by caprice. I therefore suppose you are well, and that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell is well too; and that the fine summer has restored Lord Auchinleck. I am much better than you left me; I think I am better than when I was in Scotland.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4063" id="noteref-4063" epub:type="noteref">4063</a></p>
			<p>“I forgot whether I informed you that poor Thrale has been in great danger.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4064" id="noteref-4064" epub:type="noteref">4064</a> <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale likewise has miscarried, and been much indisposed. Everybody else is well; Langton is in camp. I intend to put Lord Hailes’s description of Dryden<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4065" id="noteref-4065" epub:type="noteref">4065</a> into another edition, and as I know his accuracy, wish he would consider the dates, which I could not always settle to my own mind.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale goes to Brighthelmston, about Michaelmas, to be jolly and ride a hunting. I shall go to town, or perhaps to Oxford. Exercise and gaiety, or rather carelessness, will, I hope, dissipate all remains of his malady; and I likewise hope by the change of place, to find some opportunities of growing yet better myself. I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p id="III-page-398">“Your humble servant,<br/>
			“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“Streatham, <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 9,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4066" id="noteref-4066" epub:type="noteref">4066</a> 1779.”</p>
			<p>My readers will not be displeased at being told every slight circumstance of the manner in which <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson contrived to amuse his solitary hours. He sometimes employed himself in chymistry, sometimes in watering and pruning a vine,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4067" id="noteref-4067" epub:type="noteref">4067</a> sometimes in small experiments, at which those who may smile, should recollect that there are moments which admit of being soothed only by trifles.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4068" id="noteref-4068" epub:type="noteref">4068</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-399">On the 20th of September I defended myself against his suspicion of me, which I did not deserve; and added, “Pray let us write frequently. A whim strikes me, that we should send off a sheet once a week, like a stagecoach, whether it be full or not; nay, though it should be empty. The very sight of your handwriting would comfort me; and were a sheet to be thus sent regularly, we should much oftener convey something, were it only a few kind words.”</p>
			<p>My friend Colonel James Stuart,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4069" id="noteref-4069" epub:type="noteref">4069</a> second son of the Earl of Bute, who had distinguished himself as a good officer of the Bedfordshire militia,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4070" id="noteref-4070" epub:type="noteref">4070</a> had taken a public-spirited resolution to serve his country in its difficulties, by raising a regular regiment, and taking the command of it himself. This, in the heir of the immense property of Wortley, was highly honourable.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4071" id="noteref-4071" epub:type="noteref">4071</a> Having been in Scotland recruiting, he obligingly asked me to accompany him to Leeds, then the headquarters of his corps; from thence to London for a short time, and afterwards to other places to which the regiment might be ordered. Such an offer, at a time of the year when I had full leisure, was very pleasing; especially as I was to accompany a man of sterling good sense, information, discernment, and conviviality; and was to have a second crop in one year of London and Johnson. Of this I informed my illustrious friend, in characteristical warm terms, in a letter dated the 30th of September, from Leeds.</p>
			<p id="III-page-400">On Monday, October 4, I called at his house before he was up. He sent for me to his bedside, and expressed his satisfaction at this incidental meeting, with as much vivacity as if he had been in the gaiety of youth. He called briskly, “Frank, go and get coffee, and let us breakfast <em>in splendour</em>.”</p>
			<p>During this visit to London I had several interviews with him, which it is unnecessary to distinguish particularly. I consulted him as to the appointment of guardians to my children, in case of my death. “Sir, (said he,) do not appoint a number of guardians. When there are many, they trust one to another, and the business is neglected. I would advise you to choose only one; let him be a man of respectable character, who, for his own credit, will do what is right; let him be a rich man, so that he may be under no temptation to take advantage; and let him be a man of business, who is used to conduct affairs with ability and expertness, to whom, therefore, the execution of the trust will not be burdensome.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4072" id="noteref-4072" epub:type="noteref">4072</a>”</p>
			<p>On Sunday, October 10, we dined together at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan’s. The conversation having turned on the prevailing practice of going to the East-Indies in quest of wealth;⁠—JOHNSON. “A man had better have ten thousand pounds at the end of ten years passed in England, than twenty thousand pounds at the end of ten years passed in India, because you must compute what you <em>give</em> for money; and a man who has lived ten years in India, has given up ten years of social comfort and all those advantages which arise from living in England. The ingenious <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brown, distinguished by the name of Capability Brown,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4073" id="noteref-4073" epub:type="noteref">4073</a> <a id="III-page-401" />told me, that he was once at the seat of Lord Clive, who had returned from India with great wealth; and that he showed him at the door of his bedchamber a large chest, which he said he had once had full of gold; upon which Brown observed, ‘I am glad you can bear it so near your bedchamber.” ’ <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4074" id="noteref-4074" epub:type="noteref">4074</a></p>
			<p>We talked of the state of the poor in London.⁠—JOHNSON. “Saunders Welch,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4075" id="noteref-4075" epub:type="noteref">4075</a> the Justice, who was once High-Constable of Holborn, and had the best opportunities of knowing the state of the poor, told me, that I underrated the number, when I computed that twenty a week, that is, above a thousand a year, died of hunger; not absolutely of immediate hunger; but of the wasting and other diseases which are the consequences of hunger.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4076" id="noteref-4076" epub:type="noteref">4076</a> This happens only in so large a place as London, where people are not known. What we are told about the great sums got by begging is not true: the trade is overstocked. And, you may depend upon it, there are many who cannot get work. A particular kind of manufacture fails: those who have been used to work at it, can, for some time, work at nothing else. You meet a man begging; you charge him with idleness: he says, ‘I am willing to labour. Will you give me work?’⁠—‘I cannot.’⁠—‘Why, then you have no right to charge me with idleness.’ ” <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4077" id="noteref-4077" epub:type="noteref">4077</a></p>
			<p>We left <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan’s at seven, as Johnson had said he intended to go to evening prayers. As we walked along, he complained of a little gout in his toe, and said, “I shan’t go to prayers tonight; I shall go tomorrow: Whenever I miss church on a Sunday, I resolve to go another day. But I do not always do it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4078" id="noteref-4078" epub:type="noteref">4078</a>” This was a fair exhibition of that vibration between pious resolutions and indolence, which many of us have too often experienced.</p>
			<p>I went home with him, and we had a long quiet conversation.</p>
			<p id="III-page-402">I read him a letter from <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hugh Blair concerning Pope, (in writing whose life he was now employed,) which I shall insert as a literary curiosity.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4079" id="noteref-4079" epub:type="noteref">4079</a></p>
			<p>“TO JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ. “DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“In the year 1763, being at London, I was carried by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> John Blair, Prebendary of Westminster, to dine at old Lord Bathurst’s; where we found the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mallet, Sir James Porter, who had been Ambassadour at Constantinople, the late <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Macaulay, and two or three more. The conversation turning on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pope, Lord Bathurst told us, that <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Essay on Man</i> was originally composed by Lord Bolingbroke in prose, and that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pope did no more than put it into verse: that he had read Lord Bolingbroke’s manuscript in his own handwriting; and remembered well, that he was at a loss whether most to admire the elegance of Lord Bolingbroke’s prose, or the beauty of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pope’s verse. When Lord Bathurst told this, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mallet bade me attend, and remember this remarkable piece of information; as, by the course of Nature, I might survive his Lordship, and be a witness of his having said so. The conversation was indeed too remarkable to be forgotten. A few days after, meeting with you, who were then also in London, you will remember that I mentioned to you what had passed on this subject, as I was much struck with this anecdote. But what ascertains<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4080" id="noteref-4080" epub:type="noteref">4080</a> my recollection of it beyond doubt, is that being accustomed to keep a journal <a id="III-page-403" />of what passed when I was in London, which I wrote out every evening, I find the particulars of the above information, just as I have now given them, distinctly marked; and am thence enabled to fix this conversation to have passed on Friday, the 22nd of April, 1763.</p>
			<p>“I remember also distinctly, (though I have not for this the authority of my journal,) that the conversation going on concerning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pope, I took notice of a report which had been sometimes propagated that he did not understand Greek.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4081" id="noteref-4081" epub:type="noteref">4081</a> Lord Bathurst said to me, that he knew that to be false; for that part of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Iliad</i> was translated by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pope in his house in the country; and that in the mornings when they assembled at breakfast, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pope used frequently to repeat, with great rapture, the Greek lines which he had been translating, and then to give them his version of them, and to compare them together.</p>
			<p>“If these circumstances can be of any use to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, you have my full liberty to give them to him. I beg you will, at the same time, present to him my most respectful compliments, with best wishes for his success and fame in all his literary undertakings. I am, with great respect, my dearest Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most affectionate,</p>
			<p>“And obliged humble servant,</p>
			<p>“HUGH BLAIR.”</p>
			<p>“Broughton Park,</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Sept.</abbr> 21, 1779.”</p>
			<p>JOHNSON. “Depend upon it, Sir, this is too strongly stated. Pope may have had from Bolingbroke the philosophic <em>stamina</em> of his Essay; and admitting this to be true, Lord Bathurst did not intentionally falsify. But the thing is not true in the latitude that Blair seems to imagine; we are sure that the poetical imagery, which makes a great part of the poem, was Pope’s own.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4082" id="noteref-4082" epub:type="noteref">4082</a> It is amazing, Sir, what deviations there are from precise <a id="III-page-404" />truth, in the account which is given of almost everything.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4083" id="noteref-4083" epub:type="noteref">4083</a> I told <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale, ‘You have so little anxiety about truth, that you never tax your memory with the exact thing.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4084" id="noteref-4084" epub:type="noteref">4084</a>’ Now what is the use of the memory to truth, if one is careless of exactness? Lord Hailes’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annals of Scotland</i> are very exact; but they contain mere dry particulars.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4085" id="noteref-4085" epub:type="noteref">4085</a> They are to be considered as a Dictionary. You know such things are there; and may be looked at when you please. Robertson paints; but the misfortune is, you are sure he does not know the people whom he paints; so you cannot suppose a likeness.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4086" id="noteref-4086" epub:type="noteref">4086</a> Characters should never be given by an historian, unless he knew the people whom he describes, or copies from those who knew them.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4087" id="noteref-4087" epub:type="noteref">4087</a>”</p>
			<p>BOSWELL. “Why, Sir, do people play this trick which I observe now, when I look at your grate, putting the shovel against it to make the fire burn?” JOHNSON. “They play the trick, but it does not make the fire burn. <i>There</i> is a better; (setting the poker perpendicularly up at right angles with the grate.) In days of superstition they thought, as it made a cross with the bars, it would drive away the witch.”</p>
			<p>BOSWELL. “By associating with you, Sir, I am always getting an accession of wisdom. But perhaps a man, after knowing his own character⁠—the limited strength of his own mind, should not be desirous of having too much wisdom, considering, <i xml:lang="la">quid valeant humeri</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4088" id="noteref-4088" epub:type="noteref">4088</a> how little he can carry.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4089" id="noteref-4089" epub:type="noteref">4089</a>” JOHNSON. “Sir, be as wise as you can; let a man be <i xml:lang="la">aliis laetus, sapiens sibi</i>:</p>
			<p id="III-page-405">‘Though pleas’d to see the dolphins play,<br/>
			I mind my compass and my way.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4090" id="noteref-4090" epub:type="noteref">4090</a>’</p>
			<p>You may be wise in your study in the morning, and gay in company at a tavern in the evening. Every man is to take care of his own wisdom and his own virtue, without minding too much what others think.”</p>
			<p>He said, “Dodsley first mentioned to me the scheme of an English Dictionary;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4091" id="noteref-4091" epub:type="noteref">4091</a> but I had long thought of it.” BOSWELL. “You did not know what you were undertaking.” JOHNSON. “Yes, Sir, I knew very well what I was undertaking⁠—and very well how to do it⁠—and have done it very well.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4092" id="noteref-4092" epub:type="noteref">4092</a>” BOSWELL. “An excellent climax! and it <em>has</em> availed you. In your Preface you say, ‘What would it avail me in this gloom of solitude<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4093" id="noteref-4093" epub:type="noteref">4093</a>?’ You have been agreeably mistaken.”</p>
			<p>In his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Milton</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4094" id="noteref-4094" epub:type="noteref">4094</a> he observes, “I cannot but remark a kind of respect, perhaps unconsciously, paid to this great man by his biographers: every house in which he resided is historically mentioned, as if it were an injury to neglect naming any place that he honoured by his presence.” I had, before I read this observation, been desirous of showing that respect to Johnson, by various inquiries. Finding him this evening in a very good humour, I prevailed on him to give me an exact list of his places of residence, since he entered the metropolis as an author, which I subjoin in a note.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4095" id="noteref-4095" epub:type="noteref">4095</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-406">I mentioned to him a dispute between a friend of mine and his lady, concerning conjugal infidelity, which my friend had maintained was by no means so bad in the husband, as in the wife. JOHNSON. “Your friend was in the right, Sir. Between a man and his Maker it is a different question: but between a man and his wife, a husband’s infidelity is nothing. They are connected by children, by fortune, by serious considerations of community. Wise married women don’t trouble themselves about the infidelity in their husbands.” BOSWELL. “To be sure there is a great difference between the offence of infidelity in a man and that of his wife.” JOHNSON. “The difference is boundless. The man imposes no bastards upon his wife.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4096" id="noteref-4096" epub:type="noteref">4096</a>”</p>
			<p>Here it may be questioned whether Johnson was entirely in the right. I suppose it will not be controverted that the difference in the degree of criminality is very great, on account of consequences: but still it may be maintained, that, independent of moral obligation, infidelity is by no means a light offence in a husband; because it must hurt a delicate attachment, in which a mutual constancy is implied, with such refined sentiments as Massinger has exhibited in his play of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Picture</i>.⁠—Johnson probably at another time would have admitted this <a id="III-page-407" />opinion. And let it be kept in remembrance, that he was very careful not to give any encouragement to irregular conduct. A gentleman,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4097" id="noteref-4097" epub:type="noteref">4097</a> not adverting to the distinction made by him upon this subject, supposed a case of singular perverseness in a wife, and heedlessly said, “That then he thought a husband might do as he pleased with a safe conscience.” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, this is wild indeed (smiling) you must consider that fornication is a crime<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4098" id="noteref-4098" epub:type="noteref">4098</a> in a single man; and you cannot have more liberty by being married.”</p>
			<p>He this evening expressed himself strongly against the Roman Catholics; observing, “In everything in which they differ from us they are wrong.” He was even against the invocation of saints;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4099" id="noteref-4099" epub:type="noteref">4099</a> in short, he was in the humour of opposition.</p>
			<p>Having regretted to him that I had learnt little Greek, as is too generally the case in Scotland; that I had for a long time hardly applied at all to the study of that noble language, and that I was desirous of being told by him what method to follow; he recommended to me as easy helps, Sylvanus’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">First Book of the Iliad</i>; Dawson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lexicon to the Greek New Testament</i>; and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hesiod</i>, with <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pasoris Lexicon</i> at the end of it.</p>
			<p>On Tuesday, October 13, I dined with him at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ramsay’s, with Lord Newhaven,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4100" id="noteref-4100" epub:type="noteref">4100</a> and some other company, none of whom I recollect, but a beautiful Miss Graham,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4101" id="noteref-4101" epub:type="noteref">4101</a> a relation of his Lordship’s, who asked <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson to hob or nob with her. He was flattered by such pleasing attention, and politely told her, he never drank wine; but if she would drink a glass of water, he was much at her service. She accepted. “Oho, Sir! (said Lord Newhaven) you are caught.” JOHNSON. “Nay, I do not see <em>how</em> I am <em>caught</em>; but if I am caught, I don’t want to get free again. If I am caught, I hope to be kept.” Then when the two glasses of water were brought, smiling placidly to the young lady, he said, “Madam, let us <em>reciprocate</em>.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-408">Lord Newhaven and Johnson carried on an argument for some time, concerning the Middlesex election.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4102" id="noteref-4102" epub:type="noteref">4102</a> Johnson said, “Parliament may be considered as bound by law as a man is bound where there is nobody to tie the knot. As it is clear that the House of Commons may expel, and expel again and again, why not allow of the power to incapacitate for that parliament, rather than have a perpetual contest kept up between parliament and the people.” Lord Newhaven took the opposite side; but respectfully said, “I speak with great deference to you, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson; I speak to be instructed.” This had its full effect on my friend. He bowed his head almost as low as the table, to a complimenting nobleman; and called out, “My Lord, my Lord, I do not desire all this ceremony; let us tell our minds to one another quietly.” After the debate was over, he said, “I have got lights on the subject today, which I had not before.” This was a great deal from him, especially as he had written a pamphlet upon it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4103" id="noteref-4103" epub:type="noteref">4103</a></p>
			<p>He observed, “The House of Commons was originally not a privilege of the people, but a check for the Crown on the House of Lords. I remember Henry the Eighth wanted them to do something; they hesitated in the morning, but did it in the afternoon. He told them, ‘It is well you did; or half your heads should have been upon Temple-bar.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4104" id="noteref-4104" epub:type="noteref">4104</a>’ But the House of Commons is now no longer under the power of the crown, and therefore must be bribed.” He added, “I have no delight in talking of public affairs.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4105" id="noteref-4105" epub:type="noteref">4105</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-409">Of his fellow-collegian,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4106" id="noteref-4106" epub:type="noteref">4106</a> the celebrated <abbr>Mr.</abbr> George Whitefield, he said, “Whitefield never drew as much attention as a mountebank does; he did not draw attention by doing better than others, but by doing what was strange.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4107" id="noteref-4107" epub:type="noteref">4107</a> Were Astley<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4108" id="noteref-4108" epub:type="noteref">4108</a> to preach a sermon standing upon his head on a horse’s back, he would collect a multitude to hear him; but no wise man would say he had made a better sermon for that. I never treated Whitefield’s ministry with contempt; I believe he did good. He had devoted himself to the lower classes of mankind, and among them he was of use.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4109" id="noteref-4109" epub:type="noteref">4109</a> But when familiarity and noise claim the praise due to knowledge, art, and elegance, we must beat down such pretensions.”</p>
			<p>What I have preserved of his conversation during the remainder of my stay in London at this time, is only what follows: I told him that when I objected to keeping company with a notorious infidel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4110" id="noteref-4110" epub:type="noteref">4110</a> a celebrated friend<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4111" id="noteref-4111" epub:type="noteref">4111</a> of ours said to me, “I do not think that men who live laxly in the world, as you <a id="III-page-410" />and I do, can with propriety assume such an authority. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson may, who is uniformly exemplary in his conduct. But it is not very consistent to shun an infidel today, and get drunk tomorrow.” JOHNSON. “Nay, Sir, this is sad reasoning. Because a man cannot be right in all things, is he to be right in nothing? Because a man sometimes gets drunk, is he therefore to steal? This doctrine would very soon bring a man to the gallows.”</p>
			<p>After all, however, it is a difficult question how far sincere Christians should associate with the avowed enemies of religion; for in the first place, almost every man’s mind may be more or less “corrupted by evil communications;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4112" id="noteref-4112" epub:type="noteref">4112</a> secondly, the world may very naturally suppose that they are not really in earnest in religion, who can easily bear its opponents; and thirdly, if the profane find themselves quite well received by the pious, one of the checks upon an open declaration of their infidelity, and one of the probable chances of obliging them seriously to reflect, which their being shunned would do, is removed.</p>
			<p>He, I know not why, showed upon all occasions an aversion to go to Ireland, where I proposed to him that we should make a tour. JOHNSON. “It is the last place where I should wish to travel.” BOSWELL. “Should you not like to see Dublin, Sir?” JOHNSON. “No, Sir? Dublin is only a worse capital.” BOSWELL. “Is not the Giant’s-Causeway worth seeing?” JOHNSON. “Worth seeing? yes; but not worth going to see.”</p>
			<p>Yet he had a kindness for the Irish nation, and thus generously expressed himself to a gentleman from that country, on the subject of an UNION which artful Politicians have often had in view⁠—“Do not make an union with us, Sir. We should unite with you, only to rob you. We should have robbed the Scotch, if they had had anything of which we could have robbed them.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4113" id="noteref-4113" epub:type="noteref">4113</a>”</p>
			<p>Of an acquaintance of ours, whose manners and everything about him, though expensive, were coarse, he said, “Sir, you see in him vulgar prosperity.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-411">A foreign minister of no very high talents, who had been in his company for a considerable time quite overlooked, happened luckily to mention that he had read some of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Rambler</i> in Italian, and admired it much. This pleased him greatly; he observed that the title had been translated, <i xml:lang="it">Il Genio errante</i>, though I have been told it was rendered more ludicrously, <i xml:lang="it">Il Vagabondo</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4114" id="noteref-4114" epub:type="noteref">4114</a> and finding that this minister gave such a proof of his taste, he was all attention to him, and on the first remark which he made, however simple, exclaimed, “The Ambassadour says well⁠—His Excellency observes⁠—.” And then he expanded and enriched the little that had been said, in so strong a manner, that it appeared something of consequence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4115" id="noteref-4115" epub:type="noteref">4115</a> This was exceedingly entertaining to the company who were present, and many a time afterwards it furnished a pleasant topic of merriment: “The Ambassadour says well,” became a laughable term of applause, when no mighty matter had been expressed.</p>
			<p>I left London on Monday, October 18, and accompanied Colonel Stuart to<br/>
			Chester, where his regiment was to lye for some time.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boswell to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson.<br/>
			“Chester, October 22, 1779.</p>
			<p>“My Dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“It was not till one o’clock on Monday morning, that Colonel Stuart and I left London; for we chose to bid a cordial adieu to Lord Mountstuart, who was to set out on that day on his embassy to Turin. We drove on excellently, and reached Lichfield in good time enough that night. The Colonel had heard so preferable a character of the George, that he would not put up at the Three Crowns, so that I did not see our host Wilkins.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4116" id="noteref-4116" epub:type="noteref">4116</a> We found at the George as good accommodation as we could wish to have, and I fully enjoyed the comfortable thought that <em>I was in Lichfield again</em>. Next morning it rained very hard; and as I had much to do in a little time, <a id="III-page-412" />I ordered a post-chaise, and between eight and nine sallied forth to make a round of visits. I first went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Green, hoping to have had him to accompany me to all my other friends, but he was engaged to attend the Bishop of Sodor and Man, who was then lying at Lichfield very ill of the gout. Having taken a hasty glance at the additions to Green’s museum,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4117" id="noteref-4117" epub:type="noteref">4117</a> from which it was not easy to break away, I next went to the Friery,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4118" id="noteref-4118" epub:type="noteref">4118</a> where I at first occasioned some tumult in the ladies, who were not prepared to receive <em>company</em> so early: but my <em>name</em>, which has by wonderful felicity come to be closely associated with yours, soon made all easy; and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cobb and Miss Adye re-assumed their seats at the breakfast-table, which they had quitted with some precipitation. They received me with the kindness of an old acquaintance; and after we had joined in a cordial chorus to <em>your</em> praise, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cobb gave <em>me</em> the high satisfaction of hearing that you said, ‘Boswell is a man who I believe never left a house without leaving a wish for his return.’ And she afterwards added, that she bid you tell me, that if ever I came to Lichfield, she hoped I would take a bed at the Friery. From thence I drove to Peter Garrick’s, where I also found a very flattering welcome. He appeared to me to enjoy his usual chearfulness; and he very kindly asked me to come when I could, and pass a week with him. From <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Garrick’s, I went to the Palace to wait on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Seward.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4119" id="noteref-4119" epub:type="noteref">4119</a> I was first entertained by his lady and daughter, he himself being in bed with a cold, according to his valetudinary custom. But he desired to see me; and I found him dressed in his black gown, with a white flannel nightgown above it; so that he looked like a Dominican friar. He was good-humoured and polite; and under his roof too my reception was very pleasing. I then proceeded to Stow-hill, and first paid my respects to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gastrell,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4120" id="noteref-4120" epub:type="noteref">4120</a> whose conversation I was not willing to quit. But my sandglass was now beginning to run low, as I could not trespass too long on the Colonel’s kindness, who obligingly waited for me; so I hastened to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Aston’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4121" id="noteref-4121" epub:type="noteref">4121</a> whom I found much better than I feared I should; and there I met a brother-in-law of these ladies, who talked much of you, and very well too, as it appeared to me. It then only remained to visit <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lucy Porter, which I did, I really believe, with sincere satisfaction on both sides. I am sure I was glad to see her again; and, as I take her to be very honest, I trust she was glad to see me again; for she expressed herself so, that I could not doubt of her being in earnest. What a great keystone of kindness, my dear Sir, were you that morning! for we were all held together by our common attachment to you. I cannot say that I ever passed two hours with more self-complacency than I did those two at Lichfield. Let me not entertain any suspicion that this is idle vanity. Will not you confirm me in my persuasion, that he who finds himself so regarded has just reason to be happy?</p>
			<p id="III-page-413">“We got to Chester about midnight on Tuesday; and here again I am in a state of much enjoyment. Colonel Stuart and his officers treat me with all the civility I could wish; and I play my part admirably. <i xml:lang="la">Laetus aliis, sapiens sibi</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4122" id="noteref-4122" epub:type="noteref">4122</a> the classical sentence which you, I imagine, invented the other day, is exemplified in my present existence. The Bishop,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4123" id="noteref-4123" epub:type="noteref">4123</a> to whom I had the honour to be known several years ago, shows me much attention; and I am edified by his conversation. I must not omit to tell you, that his Lordship admires, very highly, your <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prefaces to the Poets</i>. I am daily obtaining an extension of agreeable acquaintance, so that I am kept in animated variety; and the study of the place itself, by the assistance of books, and of the Bishop, is sufficient occupation. Chester pleases my fancy more than any town I ever saw. But I will not enter upon it at all in this letter.</p>
			<p>“How long I shall stay here I cannot yet say. I told a very pleasing young lady,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4124" id="noteref-4124" epub:type="noteref">4124</a> niece to one of the Prebendaries, at whose house I saw her, ‘I have come to Chester, Madam, I cannot tell how; and far less can I tell how I am to get away from it.’ Do not think me too juvenile. I beg it of you, my dear Sir, to favour me with a letter while I am here, and add to the happiness of a happy friend, who is ever, with affectionate veneration,</p>
			<p>“Most sincerely yours,<br/>
			“James Boswell.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4125" id="noteref-4125" epub:type="noteref">4125</a></p>
			<p>“If you do not write directly, so as to catch me here, I shall be disappointed. Two lines from you will keep my lamp burning bright.”</p>
			<p>“To James Boswell, <abbr>Esq.</abbr><br/>
			“Dear Sir,</p>
			<p id="III-page-414">“Why should you importune me so earnestly to write? Of what importance can it be to hear of distant friends, to a man who finds himself welcome wherever he goes, and makes new friends faster than he can want them? If to the delight of such universal kindness of reception, anything can be added by knowing that you retain my goodwill, you may indulge yourself in the full enjoyment of that small addition.</p>
			<p>“I am glad that you made the round of Lichfield with so much success: the oftener you are seen, the more you will be liked. It was pleasing to me to read that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Aston was so well, and that Lucy Porter was so glad to see you.</p>
			<p>“In the place where you now are, there is much to be observed; and you will easily procure yourself skilful directors. But what will you do to keep away the <em>black dog</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4126" id="noteref-4126" epub:type="noteref">4126</a> that worries you at home? If you would, in compliance with your father’s advice, enquire into the old tenures and old charters of Scotland, you would certainly open to yourself many striking scenes of the manners of the middle ages.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4127" id="noteref-4127" epub:type="noteref">4127</a> The feudal system, in a country half-barbarous, is naturally productive of great anomalies in civil life. The knowledge of past times is naturally growing less in all cases not of public record; and the past time of Scotland is so unlike the present, that it is already difficult for a Scotchman to image the economy of his grandfather. Do not be tardy nor negligent; but gather up eagerly what can yet be found.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4128" id="noteref-4128" epub:type="noteref">4128</a></p>
			<p>“We have, I think, once talked of another project, a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the late insurrection in Scotland</i>, with all its incidents.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4129" id="noteref-4129" epub:type="noteref">4129</a> Many falsehoods are passing into uncontradicted history. Voltaire, who loved a striking story, has told what he<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4130" id="noteref-4130" epub:type="noteref">4130</a> could not find to be true. <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4131" id="noteref-4131" epub:type="noteref">4131</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-415">“You may make collections for either of these projects, or for both, as opportunities occur, and digest your materials at leisure. The great direction which Burton has left to men disordered like you, is this, <q>Be not solitary; be not idle</q><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4132" id="noteref-4132" epub:type="noteref">4132</a>: which I would thus modify;⁠—If you are idle, be not solitary; if you are solitary, be not idle.</p>
			<p>“There is a letter for you, from<br/>
			“Your humble servant,<br/>
			“Sam. Johnson.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4133" id="noteref-4133" epub:type="noteref">4133</a>”</p>
			<p>“London, October 27, 1779.”<br/>
			“To <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Samuel Johnson.<br/>
			“Carlisle, <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 7, 1779.</p>
			<p>“My dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“That I should importune you to write to me at Chester, is not wonderful, when you consider what an avidity I have for delight; and that the <i xml:lang="la">amor</i> of pleasure, like the <i xml:lang="la">amor nummi</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4134" id="noteref-4134" epub:type="noteref">4134</a> increases in proportion with the quantity which we possess of it. Your letter, so full of polite kindness and masterly counsel, came like a large treasure upon me, while already glittering with riches. I was quite enchanted at Chester, so that I could with difficulty quit it. But the enchantment was the reverse of that of Circé; for so far was there from being anything sensual in it, that I was <em>all mind</em>. I do not mean all reason only; for my fancy was kept finely in play. And why not?⁠—If you please I will send you a copy, or an abridgement of my Chester journal, which is truly a logbook of felicity.</p>
			<p>“The Bishop treated me with a kindness which was very flattering. I told him, that you regretted you had seen so little of Chester.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4135" id="noteref-4135" epub:type="noteref">4135</a> His Lordship bade me tell you, that he should be glad to show you more of it. I am proud to find the friendship with which you honour me is known in so many places.</p>
			<p>“I arrived here late last night. Our friend the Dean<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4136" id="noteref-4136" epub:type="noteref">4136</a> has been gone from hence some months; but I am told at my inn, that he is very <a id="III-page-416" /><q>populous</q> (popular). However, I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Law, the Archdeacon, son to the Bishop,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4137" id="noteref-4137" epub:type="noteref">4137</a> and with him I have breakfasted and dined very agreeably. I got acquainted with him at the assizes here, about a year and a half ago; he is a man of great variety of knowledge, uncommon genius, and I believe, sincere religion. I received the holy sacrament in the Cathedral in the morning, this being the first Sunday in the month; and was at prayers there in the evening. It is divinely cheering to me to think that there is a Cathedral so near Auchinleck; and I now leave Old England in such a state of mind as I am thankful to GOD for granting me.</p>
			<p>“The <em>black dog</em> that worries me at home I cannot but dread; yet as I have been for some time past in a military train, I trust I shall <em>repulse</em> him. To hear from you will animate me like the sound of a trumpet, I therefore hope, that soon after my return to the northern field, I shall receive a few lines from you.</p>
			<p>“Colonel Stuart did me the honour to escort me in his carriage to show me Liverpool, and from thence back again to Warrington, where we parted.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4138" id="noteref-4138" epub:type="noteref">4138</a> In justice to my valuable wife, I must inform you she wrote to me, that as I was so happy, she would not be so selfish as to wish me to return sooner than business absolutely required my presence. She made my clerk write to me a post or two after to the same purpose, by commission from her; and this day a kind letter from her met me at the Post-Office here, acquainting me that she and the little ones were well, and expressing all their wishes for my return home. I am, more and more, my dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your affectionate<br/>
			“And obliged humble servant,<br/>
			“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.<br/>
			“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“Your last letter was not only kind but fond. But I wish you to get rid of all intellectual excesses, and neither to exalt your pleasures, nor aggravate your vexations, beyond their real and natural state.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4139" id="noteref-4139" epub:type="noteref">4139</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-417">“Why should you not be as happy at Edinburgh as at Chester? <i xml:lang="la">In culpa est animus, qui se non effugit usquam</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4140" id="noteref-4140" epub:type="noteref">4140</a> Please yourself with your wife and children, and studies, and practice.</p>
			<p>“I have sent a petition<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4141" id="noteref-4141" epub:type="noteref">4141</a> from Lucy Porter, with which I leave it to your discretion whether it is proper to comply. Return me her letter, which I have sent, that you may know the whole case, and not be seduced to anything that you may afterwards repent. Miss Doxy perhaps you know to be <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Garrick’s niece.</p>
			<p>“If Dean Percy can be popular at Carlisle, he may be very happy. He has in his disposal two livings, each equal, or almost equal in value to the deanery; he may take one himself, and give the other to his son.</p>
			<p>“How near is the Cathedral to Auchinleck, that you are so much delighted with it? It is, I suppose, at least an hundred and fifty miles off.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4142" id="noteref-4142" epub:type="noteref">4142</a> However, if you are pleased, it is so far well.</p>
			<p>“Let me know what reception you have from your father, and the state of his health. Please him as much as you can, and add no pain to his last years.</p>
			<p>“Of our friends here I can recollect nothing to tell you. I have neither seen nor heard of Langton. Beauclerk is just returned from Brighthelmston, I am told, much better. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale and his family are still there; and his health is said to be visibly improved; he has not bathed, but hunted.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4143" id="noteref-4143" epub:type="noteref">4143</a></p>
			<p>“At Bolt-court there is much malignity, but of late little open hostility.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4144" id="noteref-4144" epub:type="noteref">4144</a> I have had a cold, but it is gone.</p>
			<p>“Make my compliments to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			<p>“I am, Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your humble servant,</p>
			<p>“London, <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 13, 1779.”</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-418">On November 22, and December 21, I wrote to him from Edinburgh, giving a very favourable report of the family of Miss Doxy’s lover;⁠—that after a good deal of enquiry I had discovered the sister of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Francis Stewart,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4145" id="noteref-4145" epub:type="noteref">4145</a> one of his amanuenses when writing his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary</i>;⁠—that I had, as desired by him, paid her a guinea for an old pocketbook of her brother’s which he had retained; and that the good woman, who was in very moderate circumstances, but contented and placid, wondered at his scrupulous and liberal honesty, and received the guinea as if sent her by Providence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4146" id="noteref-4146" epub:type="noteref">4146</a>⁠—That I had repeatedly begged of him to keep his promise to send me his letter to Lord Chesterfield, and that this <i>memento</i>, like <i xml:lang="la">Delenda est Carthago</i>, must be in every letter that I should write to him, till I had obtained my object.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4147" id="noteref-4147" epub:type="noteref">4147</a></p>
			<p>1780: <abbr>Aetat.</abbr> 71.⁠—In 1780, the world was kept in impatience for the completion of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives of the Poets</i>, upon which he was employed so far as his indolence allowed him to labour.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4148" id="noteref-4148" epub:type="noteref">4148</a></p>
			<p>I wrote to him on January 1, and March 13, sending him my notes of Lord Marchmont’s information concerning Pope;⁠—complaining that I had not heard from him for almost four months, though he was two letters in my debt;⁠—that I had suffered again from melancholy;⁠—hoping that he had been in so much better company, (the Poets,) that he had not time to think of his distant friends; for if that were the case, I should have some recompence for my uneasiness;⁠—that the state of my affairs did not admit of my coming to London this year; and begging he would return me Goldsmith’s two poems, with his lines marked.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4149" id="noteref-4149" epub:type="noteref">4149</a></p>
			<p id="III-page-419">His friend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lawrence having now suffered the greatest affliction to which a man is liable, and which Johnson himself had felt in the most severe manner; Johnson wrote to him in an admirable strain of sympathy and pious consolation.</p>
			<p>“To DR. LAWRENCE.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“At a time when all your friends ought to show their kindness, and with a character which ought to make all that know you your friends, you may wonder that you have yet heard nothing from me.</p>
			<p>“I have been hindered by a vexatious and incessant cough, for which within these ten days I have been bled once, fasted four or five times, taken physic five times, and opiates, I think, six. This day it seems to remit.</p>
			<p>“The loss, dear Sir, which you have lately suffered, I felt many years ago, and know therefore how much has been taken from you, and how little help can be had from consolation. He that outlives a wife whom he has long loved, sees himself disjoined from the only mind that has the same hopes, and fears, and interest; from the only companion with whom he has shared much good or evil; and with whom he could set his mind at liberty, to retrace the past or anticipate the future. The continuity of being is lacerated;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4150" id="noteref-4150" epub:type="noteref">4150</a> the settled course of sentiment and action is stopped; and life stands suspended and motionless, till it is driven by external causes into a new channel. But the time of suspense is dreadful.</p>
			<p>“Our first recourse in this distressed solitude, is, perhaps for want of habitual piety, to a gloomy acquiescence in necessity. Of two mortal beings, one must lose the other; but surely there is a higher and better comfort to be drawn from the consideration of that Providence which watches over all, and a belief that the living and the dead are equally in the hands of GOD, who will reunite those whom he has separated; or who sees that it is best not to reunite.</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most affectionate,</p>
			<p>“And most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“January 20, 1780.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-420">“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“Well, I had resolved to send you the Chesterfield letter; but I will write once again without it. Never impose tasks upon mortals. To require two things is the way to have them both undone.</p>
			<p>“For the difficulties which you mention in your affairs I am sorry; but difficulty is now very general: it is not therefore less grievous, for there is less hope of help. I pretend not to give you advice, not knowing the state of your affairs; and general counsels about prudence and frugality would do you little good. You are, however, in the right not to increase your own perplexity by a journey hither; and I hope that by staying at home you will please your father.</p>
			<p>“Poor dear Beauclerk<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4151" id="noteref-4151" epub:type="noteref">4151</a>⁠—<i xml:lang="la">nec, ut soles, dabis joca</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4152" id="noteref-4152" epub:type="noteref">4152</a> His wit and his folly, his acuteness and maliciousness, his merriment and reasoning, are now over. Such another will not often be found among mankind. He directed himself to be buried by the side of his mother, an instance of tenderness which I hardly expected.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4153" id="noteref-4153" epub:type="noteref">4153</a> He has left his children to the care of Lady Di, and if she dies, of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton, and of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Leicester his relation, and a man of good character. His library has been offered to sale to the Russian ambassador.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4154" id="noteref-4154" epub:type="noteref">4154</a></p>
			<p>“<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Percy, notwithstanding all the noise of the newspapers, has had no literary loss.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4155" id="noteref-4155" epub:type="noteref">4155</a> Clothes and moveables were burnt to the value of about one hundred pounds; but his papers, and I think his books, were all preserved.</p>
			<p>“Poor <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale has been in extreme danger from an apoplectical disorder, and recovered, beyond the expectation of his physicians; he is now at Bath, that his mind may be quiet, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale and Miss are with him.</p>
			<p id="III-page-421">“Having told you what has happened to your friends, let me say something to you of yourself. You are always complaining of melancholy, and I conclude from those complaints that you are fond of it. No man talks of that which he is desirous to conceal, and every man desires to conceal that of which he is ashamed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4156" id="noteref-4156" epub:type="noteref">4156</a> Do not pretend to deny it; <i xml:lang="la">manifestum habemus furem</i>; make it an invariable and obligatory law to yourself, never to mention your own mental diseases; if you are never to speak of them, you will think on them but little, and if you think little of them, they will molest you rarely. When you talk of them, it is plain that you want either praise or pity; for praise there is no room, and pity will do you no good; therefore, from this hour speak no more, think no more, about them.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4157" id="noteref-4157" epub:type="noteref">4157</a></p>
			<p>“Your transaction with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stewart gave me great satisfaction; I am much obliged to you for your attention. Do not lose sight of her; your countenance may be of great credit, and of consequence of great advantage to her. The memory of her brother is yet fresh in my mind; he was an ingenious and worthy man.</p>
			<p>“Please to make my compliments to your lady, and to the young ladies. I should like to see them, pretty loves.</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Yours affectionately,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“April 8, 1780.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale being now at Bath with her husband, the correspondence between Johnson and her was carried on briskly. I shall present my readers with one of her original letters to him at this time, which will amuse them probably more than those well-written but studied epistles which she has inserted in her collection, because it exhibits the easy vivacity of their literary intercourse. It is also of value as a key to Johnson’s answer, which she has printed by itself, and of which I shall subjoin extracts.</p>
			<p>“MRS. THRALE TO DR. JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“I had a very kind letter from you yesterday, dear Sir, with a most circumstantial date.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4158" id="noteref-4158" epub:type="noteref">4158</a> You took trouble with my circulating <a id="III-page-422" />letter, <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4159" id="noteref-4159" epub:type="noteref">4159</a> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Evans writes me word, and I thank you sincerely for so doing: one might do mischief else not being on the spot.</p>
			<p>“Yesterday’s evening was passed at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu’s: there was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Melmoth;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4160" id="noteref-4160" epub:type="noteref">4160</a> I do not like him <em>though</em>, nor he me; it was expected we should have pleased each other; he is, however, just Tory enough to hate the Bishop of Peterborough<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4161" id="noteref-4161" epub:type="noteref">4161</a> for Whiggism, and Whig enough to abhor you for Toryism.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu flattered him finely; so he had a good afternoon on’t. This evening we spend at a concert. Poor Queeney’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4162" id="noteref-4162" epub:type="noteref">4162</a> sore eyes have just released her; she had a long confinement, and could neither read nor write, so my master<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4163" id="noteref-4163" epub:type="noteref">4163</a> treated her very good-naturedly with the visits of a young woman in this town, a tailor’s daughter, who professes music, and teaches so as to give six lessons a day to ladies, at five and threepence a lesson. Miss Burney says she is a great performer; and I respect the wench for getting her living so prettily; she is very modest and pretty-mannered, and not seventeen years old.</p>
			<p>“You live in a fine whirl indeed; if I did not write regularly you would half forget me, and that would be very wrong, for I <em>felt</em> my regard for you in my <em>face</em> last night, when the criticisms were going on.</p>
			<p>“This morning it was all connoisseurship; we went to see some pictures painted by a gentleman-artist, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Taylor, of this place; my master makes one, everywhere, and has got a good dawling<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4164" id="noteref-4164" epub:type="noteref">4164</a> companion to ride with him now. He looks well enough, but I have no notion of health for a man whose mouth cannot be <a id="III-page-423" />sewed up.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4165" id="noteref-4165" epub:type="noteref">4165</a> Burney<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4166" id="noteref-4166" epub:type="noteref">4166</a> and I and Queeney teize him every meal he eats, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu is quite serious with him; but what <em>can</em> one do? He will eat, I think, and if he does eat I know he will not live; it makes me very unhappy, but I must bear it. Let me always have your friendship. I am, most sincerely, dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your faithful servant,</p>
			<p>“H. L. T.”</p>
			<p>“Bath, Friday, April 28.”</p>
			<p>“DR. JOHNSON TO MRS. THRALE.</p>
			<p>“DEAREST MADAM,</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale never will live abstinently, till he can persuade himself to live by rule.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4167" id="noteref-4167" epub:type="noteref">4167</a></p>
			<p>* * * * *</p>
			<p>Encourage, as you can, the musical girl.</p>
			<p>“Nothing is more common than mutual dislike, where mutual approbation is particularly expected. There is often on both sides a vigilance not over-benevolent; and as attention is strongly excited, so that nothing drops unheeded, any difference in taste or opinion, and some difference where there is no restraint will commonly appear, immediately generates dislike.</p>
			<p>“Never let criticisms operate upon your face or your mind; it is very rarely that an author is hurt by his critics. The blaze of reputation cannot be blown out, but it often dies in the socket;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4168" id="noteref-4168" epub:type="noteref">4168</a> a very few names may be considered as perpetual lamps that shine unconsumed. From <a id="III-page-424" />the author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fitzosborne’s Letters</i> I cannot think myself in much danger. I met him only once about thirty years ago, and in some small dispute reduced him to whistle; having not seen him since, that is the last impression. Poor Moore, the fabulist,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4169" id="noteref-4169" epub:type="noteref">4169</a> was one of the company.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu’s long stay, against her own inclination, is very convenient. You would, by your own confession, want a companion; and she is <i xml:lang="la">par pluribus</i>; conversing with her you may <em>find variety in one</em>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4170" id="noteref-4170" epub:type="noteref">4170</a>”</p>
			<p>“London, May 1, 1780.”</p>
			<p>On the and of May I wrote to him, and requested that we might have another meeting somewhere in the North of England, in the autumn of this year.</p>
			<p>From <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langton I received soon after this time a letter, of which I extract a passage, relative both to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beauclerk and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson.</p>
			<p>“The melancholy information you have received concerning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beauclerk’s death is true. Had his talents been directed in any sufficient degree as they ought, I have always been strongly of opinion that they were calculated to make an illustrious figure; and that opinion, as it had been in part formed upon <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s judgment, receives more and more confirmation by hearing what, since his death, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson has said concerning them; a few evenings ago, he was at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vesey’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4171" id="noteref-4171" epub:type="noteref">4171</a> where Lord Althorpe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4172" id="noteref-4172" epub:type="noteref">4172</a> who was one of a numerous company there, addressed <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson on the subject of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beauclerk’s death, saying, ‘Our CLUB has had a great loss since we met last.’ He replied, ‘A loss, that perhaps the whole nation could not repair!’ The Doctor then went on to speak of his endowments, and particularly extolled the <a id="III-page-425" />wonderful ease with which he uttered what was highly excellent. He said, that ‘no man ever was so free when he was going to say a good thing, from a <em>look</em> that expressed that it was coming; or, when he had said it, from a look that expressed that it had come.’ At <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale’s, some days before when we were talking on the same subject, he said, referring to the same idea of his wonderful facility, ‘That Beauclerk’s talents were those which he had felt himself more disposed to envy, than those of any whom he had known.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4173" id="noteref-4173" epub:type="noteref">4173</a>’</p>
			<p>“On the evening I have spoken of above, at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vesey’s, you would have been much gratified, as it exhibited an instance of the high importance in which <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson’s character is held, I think even beyond any I ever before was witness to. The company consisted chiefly of ladies, among whom were the Duchess Dowager of Portland,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4174" id="noteref-4174" epub:type="noteref">4174</a> the Duchess of Beaufort, whom I suppose from her rank I must name before her mother <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boscawen, and her elder sister <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lewson, who was likewise there; Lady Lucan,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4175" id="noteref-4175" epub:type="noteref">4175</a> Lady Clermont, and others of note both for their station and understandings. Among the gentlemen were Lord Althorpe, whom I have before named, Lord Macartney, Sir Joshua Reynolds, Lord Lucan, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wraxal,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4176" id="noteref-4176" epub:type="noteref">4176</a> whose book you have probably seen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Tour to the Northern Parts of Europe</i>; a very agreeable ingenious man; <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Warren, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys, the Master in Chancery, whom I believe you know, and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Barnard, the Provost of <a id="III-page-426" />Eton.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4177" id="noteref-4177" epub:type="noteref">4177</a> As soon as <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson was come in and had taken a chair,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4178" id="noteref-4178" epub:type="noteref">4178</a> the company began to collect round him, till they became not less than four, if not five, deep; those behind standing, and listening over the heads of those that were sitting near him.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4179" id="noteref-4179" epub:type="noteref">4179</a> The conversation for some time was chiefly between <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson and the Provost of Eton, while the others contributed occasionally their remarks. Without attempting to detail the particulars of the conversation, which perhaps if I did, I should spin my account out to a tedious length, I thought, my dear Sir, this general account of the respect with which our valued friend was attended to, might be acceptable.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4180" id="noteref-4180" epub:type="noteref">4180</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-427">“To THE REVEREND DR. FARMER.</p>
			<p>“May 25, 1780.</p>
			<p>Sir,</p>
			<p>“I know your disposition to second any literary attempt, and therefore venture upon the liberty of entreating you to procure from College or University registers, all the dates, or other informations which they can supply, relating to Ambrose Philips, Broome, and Gray, who were all of Cambridge, and of whose lives I am to give such accounts as I can gather. Be pleased to forgive this trouble from, Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,</p>
			<p>“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>While Johnson was thus engaged in preparing a delightful literary entertainment for the world, the tranquillity of the metropolis of Great-Britain was unexpectedly disturbed, by the most horrid series of outrage that ever disgraced a civilised country. A relaxation of some of the severe penal provisions against our fellow-subjects of the Catholic communion had been granted by the legislature, with an opposition so inconsiderable that the genuine mildness of Christianity, united with liberal policy, seemed to have become general in this island.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4181" id="noteref-4181" epub:type="noteref">4181</a> But <a id="III-page-428" />a dark and malignant spirit of persecution soon showed itself, in an unworthy petition for the repeal of the wise and humane statute. That petition was brought forward by a mob, with the evident purpose of intimidation, and was justly rejected. But the attempt was accompanied and followed by such daring violence as is unexampled in history. Of this extraordinary tumult, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson has given the following concise, lively, and just account in his _Letters to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4182" id="noteref-4182" epub:type="noteref">4182</a>:⁠—</p>
			<p>“On Friday,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4183" id="noteref-4183" epub:type="noteref">4183</a> the good Protestants met in Saint George’s-Fields, at the summons of Lord George Gordon, and marching to Westminster, insulted the Lords and Commons, who all bore it with great tameness. At night the outrages began by the demolition of the mass-house by Lincoln’s-Inn.”</p>
			<p>“An exact journal of a week’s defiance of government I cannot give you. On Monday, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4184" id="noteref-4184" epub:type="noteref">4184</a> who had been insulted, spoke to Lord Mansfield, who had I think been insulted too, of the licentiousness of the populace; and his Lordship treated it as a very slight irregularity. On Tuesday night<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4185" id="noteref-4185" epub:type="noteref">4185</a> they pulled down Fielding’s house, and burnt his goods in the street. They had gutted on Monday Sir George Savile’s house, but the building was saved. On Tuesday <a id="III-page-429" />evening, leaving Fielding’s ruins, they went to Newgate to demand their companions who had been seized demolishing the chapel. The keeper could not release them but by the Mayor’s permission, which he went to ask; at his return he found all the prisoners released, and Newgate in a blaze. They then went to Bloomsbury, and fastened upon Lord Mansfield’s house, which they pulled down; and as for his goods, they totally burnt them.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4186" id="noteref-4186" epub:type="noteref">4186</a> They have since gone to Caen-wood, but a guard was there before them. They plundered some Papists, I think, and burnt a mass-house<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4187" id="noteref-4187" epub:type="noteref">4187</a> in Moorfields the same night.”</p>
			<p>“On Wednesday I walked with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Scott to look at Newgate, and found it in ruins, with the fire yet glowing. As I went by, the Protestants were plundering the Sessions-house at the Old-Bailey. There were not, I believe, a hundred; but they did their work at leisure, in full security, without sentinels, without trepidation, as men lawfully employed, in full day. Such is the cowardice of a commercial place. On Wednesday they broke open the Fleet, and the King’s-Bench, and the Marshalsea, and Wood-street Compter, and Clerkenwell Bridewell, and released all the prisoners.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4188" id="noteref-4188" epub:type="noteref">4188</a>”</p>
			<p>“At night they set fire to the Fleet, and to the King’s-Bench, and I know not how many other places; and one might see the glare of conflagration fill the sky from many parts. The sight was dreadful. Some people were threatened: <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan advised me to take care of myself. Such a time of terror you have been happy in not seeing.”</p>
			<p>“The King said in Council, ‘That the magistrates had not done their duty, but that he would do his own;’ and a proclamation was published, directing us to keep our servants within doors, as the peace was now to be preserved by force. The soldiers were sent out to different parts, and the town is now [<i>June</i> 9] at quiet.”</p>
			<p>“The soldiers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4189" id="noteref-4189" epub:type="noteref">4189</a> are stationed so as to be everywhere within call: <a id="III-page-430" />there is no longer anybody of rioters, and the individuals are hunted to their holes, and led to prison; Lord George was last night sent to the Tower. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Wilkes was this day<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4190" id="noteref-4190" epub:type="noteref">4190</a> in my neighbourhood, to seize the publisher of a seditious paper.”</p>
			<p>“Several chapels have been destroyed, and several inoffensive Papists have been plundered; but the high sport was to burn the gaols. This was a good rabble trick. The debtors and the criminals were all set at liberty; but of the criminals, as has always happened, many are already retaken; and two pirates have surrendered themselves, and it is expected that they will be pardoned.”</p>
			<p>“Government now acts again with its proper force; and we are all<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4191" id="noteref-4191" epub:type="noteref">4191</a> under the protection of the King and the law. I thought that it would be agreeable to you and my master to have my testimony to the public security; and that you would sleep more quietly when I told you that you are safe.”</p>
			<p>“There has, indeed, been an universal panic from which the King was the first that recovered. Without the concurrence of his ministers, or the assistance of the civil magistrate, he put the soldiers in motion, and saved the town from calamities, such as a rabble’s government must naturally produce.”</p>
			<p>“The public<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4192" id="noteref-4192" epub:type="noteref">4192</a> has escaped a very heavy calamity. The rioters attempted the Bank on Wednesday night, but in no great number; and like other thieves, with no great resolution. Jack Wilkes headed the party that drove them away. It is agreed, that if they had seized the Bank on Tuesday, at the height of the panic, when no resistance had been prepared, they might have carried irrecoverably away whatever they had found. Jack, who was always zealous for order and decency,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4193" id="noteref-4193" epub:type="noteref">4193</a> declares that if he be trusted with power, he will not leave a rioter alive. There is, however, now no longer any need of heroism or bloodshed; no blue ribband<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4194" id="noteref-4194" epub:type="noteref">4194</a> is any longer worn.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4195" id="noteref-4195" epub:type="noteref">4195</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-431">Such was the end of this miserable sedition, from which London was delivered by the magnanimity of the Sovereign himself. Whatever some may maintain, I am satisfied that there was no combination or plan, either domestic or foreign; but that the mischief spread by a gradual contagion of frenzy, augmented by the quantities of fermented liquors, of which the deluded populace possessed themselves in the course of their depredations.</p>
			<p>I should think myself very much to blame, did I here neglect to do justice to my esteemed friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Akerman, the keeper of Newgate, who long discharged a very important trust with an uniform intrepid firmness, and at the same time a tenderness and a liberal charity, which entitle him to be recorded with distinguished honour.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4196" id="noteref-4196" epub:type="noteref">4196</a></p>
			<p>Upon this occasion, from the timidity and negligence of magistracy on the one hand, and the almost incredible exertions of the mob on the other, the first prison of this great country was laid open, and the prisoners set free; but that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Akerman, whose house was burnt, would have prevented all this, had proper aid been sent to him in due time, there can be no doubt.</p>
			<p>Many years ago, a fire broke out in the brick part which was built as an addition to the old gaol of Newgate. The prisoners were in consternation and tumult, calling out, “We shall be <a id="III-page-432" />burnt⁠—we shall be burnt! Down with the gate⁠—down with the gate!” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Akerman hastened to them, showed himself at the gate, and having, after some confused vociferation of “Hear him⁠—hear him!” obtained a silent attention, he then calmly told them, that the gate must not go down; that they were under his care, and that they should not be permitted to escape: but that he could assure them, they need not be afraid of being burnt, for that the fire was not in the prison, properly so called, which was strongly built with stone; and that if they would engage to be quiet, he himself would come in to them, and conduct them to the further end of the building, and would not go out till they gave him leave. To this proposal they agreed; upon which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Akerman, having first made them fall back from the gate, went in, and with a determined resolution, ordered the outer turnkey upon no account to open the gate, even though the prisoners (though he trusted they would not) should break their word, and by force bring himself to order it. “Never mind me, (said he,) should that happen.” The prisoners peaceably followed him, while he conducted them through passages of which he had the keys, to the extremity of the gaol which was most distant from the fire. Having, by this very judicious conduct, fully satisfied them that there was no immediate risk, if any at all, he then addressed them thus: “Gentlemen, you are now convinced that I told you true. I have no doubt that the engines will soon extinguish this fire; if they should not, a sufficient guard will come, and you shall all be taken out and lodged in the Compters.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4197" id="noteref-4197" epub:type="noteref">4197</a> I assure you, upon my word and honour, that I have not a farthing insured. I have left my house, that I might take care of you. I will keep my promise, and stay with you if you insist upon it; but if you will allow me to go out and look after my family and property, I shall<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4198" id="noteref-4198" epub:type="noteref">4198</a> be obliged to you.” Struck with his behaviour, they called out, “Master Akerman, you have done bravely; it was very kind in you: by all means go and take care of your own concerns.” He did so accordingly, while they remained, and were all preserved.</p>
			<p id="III-page-433">Johnson has been heard to relate the substance of this story with high praise, in which he was joined by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burke. My illustrious friend, speaking of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Akerman’s kindness to his prisoners, pronounced this eulogy upon his character:⁠—“He who has long had constantly in his view the worst of mankind, and is yet eminent for the humanity of his disposition, must have had it originally in a great degree, and continued to cultivate it very carefully.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4199" id="noteref-4199" epub:type="noteref">4199</a>”</p>
			<p>In the course of this month my brother David waited upon <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson, with the following letter of introduction, which I had taken care should be lying ready on his arrival in London.</p>
			<p>“To DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“Edinburgh, April 29, 1780.</p>
			<p>“MY DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“This will be delivered to you by my brother David, on his return from Spain. You will be glad to see the man who vowed to ‘stand by the old castle of Auchinleck, with heart, purse, and sword;’ that romantic family solemnity devised by me, of which you and I talked with complacency upon the spot. I trust that twelve years of absence have not lessened his feudal attachment; and that you will find him worthy of being introduced to your acquaintance.</p>
			<p>“I have the honour to be,</p>
			<p>“With affectionate veneration,</p>
			<p>“My dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most faithful humble servant,</p>
			<p>“JAMES BOSWELL.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-434">Johnson received him very politely, and has thus mentioned him in a letter to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thrale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4200" id="noteref-4200" epub:type="noteref">4200</a>: “I have had with me a brother of Boswell’s, a Spanish merchant,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4201" id="noteref-4201" epub:type="noteref">4201</a> whom the war has driven from his residence at Valentia; he is gone to see his friends, and will find Scotland but a sorry place after twelve years’ residence in a happier climate. He is a very agreeable man, and speaks no Scotch.”</p>
			<p>“To DR. BEATTIE, AT ABERDEEN.</p>
			<p>“Sir,</p>
			<p>“More years<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4202" id="noteref-4202" epub:type="noteref">4202</a> than I have any delight to reckon, have past since you and I saw one another; of this, however, there is no reason for making any reprehensory complaint⁠—<i xml:lang="la">Sic fata ferunt</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4203" id="noteref-4203" epub:type="noteref">4203</a>. But methinks there might pass some small interchange of regard between us. If you say, that I ought to have written, I now write; and I write to tell you, that I have much kindness for you and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Beattie; and that I wish your health better, and your life long. Try change of air, and come a few degrees Southwards: a softer climate may do you both good; winter is coming on; and London will be warmer, and gayer, and busier, and more fertile of amusement than Aberdeen.</p>
			<p>“My health is better; but that will be little in the balance, when I tell you that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Montagu has been very ill, and is I doubt now but weakly. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale has been very dangerously disordered; but is much better, and I hope will totally recover. He has withdrawn himself from business the whole summer. Sir Joshua and his sister are well; and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Davies has got great success as an author,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4204" id="noteref-4204" epub:type="noteref">4204</a> generated by the corruption of a bookseller.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4205" id="noteref-4205" epub:type="noteref">4205</a> More news I have not to tell you, and <a id="III-page-435" />therefore you must be contented with hearing, what I know not whether you much wish to hear,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4206" id="noteref-4206" epub:type="noteref">4206</a> that I am, Sir,</p>
			<p>“Your most humble servant,<br/>
			“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“Bolt-court, Fleet-street,<br/>
			August 21, 1780.”</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, <abbr class="eoc">Esq.</abbr></p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I find you have taken one of your fits of taciturnity, and have resolved not to write till you are written to; it is but a peevish humour, but you shall have your way.</p>
			<p>“I have sat at home in Bolt-court, all the summer, thinking to write the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives</i>, and a great part of the time only thinking. Several of them, however, are done, and I still think to do the rest.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale and his family have, since his illness, passed their time first at Bath, and then at Brighthelmston; but I have been at neither place. I would have gone to Lichfield, if I could have had time, and I might have had time if I had been active; but I have missed much, and done little.</p>
			<p>“In the late disturbances, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale’s house and stock were in great danger; the mob was pacified at their first invasion, with about fifty pounds in drink and meat; and at their second, were driven away by the soldiers.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4207" id="noteref-4207" epub:type="noteref">4207</a> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Strahan got a garrison into his house, and maintained them a fortnight; he was so frighted that he removed part of his goods. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams took shelter in the country.</p>
			<p>“I know not whether I shall get a ramble this autumn;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4208" id="noteref-4208" epub:type="noteref">4208</a> it is now about the time when we were travelling. I have, however, better health than I had then, and hope you and I may yet show ourselves on some part of Europe, Asia, or Africa.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4209" id="noteref-4209" epub:type="noteref">4209</a> In the meantime let us play no trick, but keep each other’s kindness by all means in our power.</p>
			<p id="III-page-436">“The bearer of this is <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dunbar, of Aberdeen, who has written and published a very ingenious book,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4210" id="noteref-4210" epub:type="noteref">4210</a> and who I think has a kindness for me, and will, when he knows you, have a kindness for you.</p>
			<p>“I suppose your little ladies are grown tall; and your son is become a learned young man. I love them all, and I love your naughty lady, whom I never shall persuade to love me. When the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives</i> are done, I shall send them to complete her collection, but must send them in paper, as for want of a pattern, I cannot bind them to fit the rest.</p>
			<p>“I am, Sir,<br/>
			“Yours most affectionately,<br/>
			“SAM. JOHNSON.”<br/>
			“London, <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 21, 1780.”</p>
			<p>This year he wrote to a young clergyman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4211" id="noteref-4211" epub:type="noteref">4211</a> in the country, the following very excellent letter, which contains valuable advice to Divines in general:⁠—</p>
			<p>“Dear Sir,</p>
			<p>“Not many days ago <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Lawrence showed me a letter, in which you make mention of me: I hope, therefore, you will not be displeased that I endeavour to preserve your goodwill by some observations which your letter suggested to me.</p>
			<p>“You are afraid of falling into some improprieties in the daily service by reading to an audience that requires no exactness. Your fear, I hope, secures you from danger. They who contract absurd habits are such as have no fear. It is impossible to do the same thing <a id="III-page-437" />very often, without some peculiarity of manner: but that manner may be good or bad, and a little care will at least preserve it from being bad: to make it good, there must, I think, be something of natural or casual felicity, which cannot be taught.</p>
			<p>“Your present method of making your sermons seems very judicious. Few frequent preachers can be supposed to have sermons more their own than yours will be. Take care to register, somewhere or other, the authors from whom your several discourses are borrowed; and do not imagine that you shall always remember, even what perhaps you now think it impossible to forget.</p>
			<p>“My advice, however, is, that you attempt, from time to time, an original sermon; and in the labour of composition, do not burden your mind with too much at once; do not exact from yourself at one effort of excogitation, propriety of thought and elegance of expression. Invent first, and then embellish. The production of something, where nothing was before, is an act of greater energy than the expansion or decoration of the thing produced. Set down diligently your thoughts as they rise, in the first words that occur; and, when you have matter, you will easily give it form: nor, perhaps, will this method be always necessary; for by habit, your thoughts and diction will flow together.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4212" id="noteref-4212" epub:type="noteref">4212</a></p>
			<p>“The composition of sermons is not very difficult: the divisions not only help the memory of the hearer, but direct the judgement of the writer; they supply sources of invention, and keep every part in its proper place.</p>
			<p>“What I like least in your letter is your account of the manners of your parish; from which I gather, that it has been long neglected by the parson. The Dean of Carlisle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4213" id="noteref-4213" epub:type="noteref">4213</a> who was then a little rector in Northamptonshire,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4214" id="noteref-4214" epub:type="noteref">4214</a> told me, that it might be discerned whether or no there was a clergyman resident in a parish by the civil or savage manner of the people. Such a congregation as yours stands in need of much reformation; and I would not have you think it impossible to reform them. A very savage parish was civilised by a decayed gentlewoman, who came among them to teach a petty school. My learned friend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Wheeler<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4215" id="noteref-4215" epub:type="noteref">4215</a> of Oxford, when he was a young man, had the care of a neighbouring parish for fifteen pounds a year, which he was never paid; but he counted it a convenience that it compelled him to make a sermon weekly. One woman he could not bring to the communion; and, when he reproved or exhorted her, she only <a id="III-page-438" />answered, that she was no scholar. He was advised to set some good woman or man of the parish, a little wiser than herself, to talk to her in a language level to her mind. Such honest, I may call them holy artifices, must be practised by every clergyman; for all means must be tried by which souls may be saved.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4216" id="noteref-4216" epub:type="noteref">4216</a> Talk to your people, however, as much as you can; and you will find, that the more frequently you converse with them upon religious subjects, the more willingly they will attend, and the more submissively they will learn. A clergyman’s diligence always makes him venerable. I think I have now only to say, that in the momentous work you have undertaken, I pray GOD to bless you.</p>
			<p>“I am, Sir,<br/>
			“Your most humble servant,<br/>
			“SAM. JOHNSON.”</p>
			<p>“Bolt-court, <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 30, 1780.”</p>
			<p>My next letters to him were dated August 24, September 6, and October 1, and from them I extract the following passages:⁠—</p>
			<p>“My brother David and I find the long indulged fancy of our comfortable meeting again at Auchinleck, so well realised, that it in some degree confirms the pleasing hope of <i xml:lang="la">O! preclarum diem!</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4217" id="noteref-4217" epub:type="noteref">4217</a> in a future state.”</p>
			<p>“I beg that you may never again harbour a suspicion of my indulging a peevish humour, or playing tricks; you will recollect that when I confessed to you, that I had once been intentionally silent to try your regard, I gave you my word and honour that I would not do so again.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4218" id="noteref-4218" epub:type="noteref">4218</a>”</p>
			<p>“I rejoice to hear of your good state of health; I pray GOD to continue it long. I have often said, that I would willingly have ten years added to my life, to have ten taken from yours; I mean, that I would be ten years older to have you ten years younger. But let me be thankful for the years during which I have enjoyed your friendship, and please myself with the hopes of enjoying it many years to come in this state of being, trusting always, that in another state, we shall meet never to be separated. Of this we can form no notion; but the thought, though indistinct, is delightful, when the mind is calm and clear.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4219" id="noteref-4219" epub:type="noteref">4219</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-439">“The riots in London were certainly horrible; but you give me no account of your own situation, during the barbarous anarchy. A description of it by DR. JOHNSON would be a great painting;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4220" id="noteref-4220" epub:type="noteref">4220</a> you might write another <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">London, a Poem</i>.”</p>
			<p>“I am charmed with your condescending affectionate expression, ‘let us keep each other’s kindness by all the means in our power;’ my revered Friend! how elevating is it to my mind, that I am found worthy to be a companion to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Samuel Johnson! All that you have said in grateful praise of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Walmsley,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4221" id="noteref-4221" epub:type="noteref">4221</a> I have long thought of you; but we are both Tories,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4222" id="noteref-4222" epub:type="noteref">4222</a> which has a very general influence upon our sentiments. I hope that you will agree to meet me at York, about the end of this month; or if you will come to Carlisle, that would be better still, in case the Dean be there. Please to consider, that to keep each other’s kindness, we should every year have that free and intimate communication of mind which can be had only when we are together. We should have both our solemn and our pleasant talk.”</p>
			<p>“I write now for the third time, to tell you that my desire for our meeting this autumn, is much increased. I wrote to Squire Godfrey Bosville,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4223" id="noteref-4223" epub:type="noteref">4223</a> my Yorkshire chief, that I should, perhaps, pay him a visit, as I was to hold a conference with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson at York. I give you my word and honour that I said not a word of his inviting you; but he wrote to me as follows:⁠—</p>
			<p>“ ‘I need not tell you I shall be happy to see you here the latter end of this month, as you propose; and I shall likewise be in hopes that you will persuade <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson to finish the conference here. It will add to the favour of your own company, if you prevail upon such an associate, to assist your observations. I have often been entertained with his writings, and I once belonged to a club of which he was a member, and I never spent an evening there, but I heard something from him well worth remembering.’</p>
			<p>“We have thus, my dear Sir, good comfortable quarters in the neighbourhood of York, where you may be assured we shall be heartily welcome. I pray you then resolve to set out; and let not the year 1780 be a blank in our social calendar, and in that record of wisdom and wit, which I keep with so much diligence, to your honour, and the instruction and delight of others.”</p>
			<p id="III-page-440"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale had now another contest for the representation in parliament of the borough of Southwark, and Johnson kindly lent him his assistance, by writing advertisements and letters for him. I shall insert one as a specimen:</p>
			<p>“TO THE WORTHY ELECTORS OF THE BOROUGH OF SOUTHWARK.</p>
			<p>“GENTLEMEN,</p>
			<p>“A new Parliament being now called, I again solicit the honour of being elected for one of your representatives; and solicit it with the greater confidence, as I am not conscious of having neglected my duty, or of having acted otherwise than as becomes the independent representative of independent constituents; superior to fear, hope, and expectation, who has no private purposes to promote, and whose prosperity is involved in the prosperity of his country. As my recovery from a very severe distemper is not yet perfect, I have declined to attend the Hall, and hope an omission so necessary will not be harshly censured.</p>
			<p>“I can only send my respectful wishes, that all your deliberations may tend to the happiness of the kingdom, and the peace of the borough.</p>
			<p>“I am, Gentlemen,</p>
			<p>“Your most faithful</p>
			<p>“And obedient servant,</p>
			<p>“HENRY THRALE.”</p>
			<p>“Southwark, <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 5, 1780.”</p>
			<p>On his birthday, Johnson has this note:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I am now beginning the seventy-second year of my life, with more strength of body, and greater vigour of mind, than I think is common at that age.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4224" id="noteref-4224" epub:type="noteref">4224</a>”</p>
			<p>But still he complains of sleepless nights and idle days, and forgetfulness, or neglect of resolutions. He thus pathetically expresses himself⁠—</p>
			<p>“Surely I shall not spend my whole life with my own total disapprobation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4225" id="noteref-4225" epub:type="noteref">4225</a>”</p>
			<p id="III-page-441"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Macbean, whom I have mentioned more than once, as one of Johnson’s humble friends, a deserving but unfortunate man, being now oppressed by age and poverty, Johnson solicited the Lord Chancellor Thurlow, to have him admitted into the Charterhouse. I take the liberty to insert his Lordship’s answer,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4226" id="noteref-4226" epub:type="noteref">4226</a> as I am eager to embrace every occasion of augmenting the respectable notion which should ever be entertained of my illustrious friend:⁠—</p>
			<p>“To DR. SAMUEL JOHNSON.</p>
			<p>“London, October 24, 1780.</p>
			<p>“SIR,</p>
			<p>“I have this moment received your letter, dated the 19th, and returned from Bath.</p>
			<p>“In the beginning of the summer I placed one in the Chartreux,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4227" id="noteref-4227" epub:type="noteref">4227</a> without the sanction of a recommendation so distinct and so authoritative as yours of Macbean; and I am afraid, that according to the establishment of the House, the opportunity of making the charity so good amends will not soon recur. But whenever a vacancy shall happen, if you’ll favour me with notice of it, I will try to recommend him to the place, even though it should not be my turn to nominate.</p>
			<p>“I am, Sir, with great regard,</p>
			<p>“Your most faithful</p>
			<p>“And obedient servant,</p>
			<p>“THURLOW.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4228" id="noteref-4228" epub:type="noteref">4228</a>”</p>
			<p>“To JAMES BOSWELL, ESQ.</p>
			<p>“DEAR SIR,</p>
			<p>“I am sorry to write you a letter that will not please you, and yet it is at last what I resolve to do. This year must pass without an interview; the summer has been foolishly lost, like many other of my summers and winters. I hardly saw a green field, but stayed in town to work, without working much.</p>
			<p id="III-page-442">“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thrale’s loss of health has lost him the election;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4229" id="noteref-4229" epub:type="noteref">4229</a> he is now going to Brighthelmston, and expects me to go with him; and how long I shall stay, I cannot tell. I do not much like the place, but yet I shall go, and stay while my stay is desired. We must, therefore, content ourselves with knowing what we know as well as man can know the mind of man, that we love one another, and that we wish each other’s happiness, and that the lapse of a year cannot lessen our mutual kindness.</p>
			<p>“I was pleased to be told that I accused <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell unjustly, in supposing that she bears me ill-will. I love you so much, that I would be glad to love all that love you, and that you love; and I have love very ready for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Boswell, if she thinks it worthy of acceptance. I hope all the young ladies and gentlemen are well.</p>
			<p>“I take a great liking to your brother. He tells me that his father received him kindly, but not fondly; however, you seem to have lived well enough at Auchinleck, while you stayed. Make your father as happy as you can.</p>
			<p>“You lately told me of your health: I can tell you in return, that my health has been for more than a year past, better than it has been for many years before. Perhaps it may please GOD to give us some time together before we are parted.</p>
			<p>“I am, dear Sir,<br/>
			“Yours most affectionately,<br/>
			“SAM. JOHNSON.”<br/>
			“October 17, 1780.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
